=== PDF PAGE 411 ===
CHAPTER 11
Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
FIGURE 11.1 Escherichia coli (left) may not appear to have much in common with an elephant (right), but the genetic blueprints for these
vastly different organisms are both encoded in DNA. (credit left: modification of work by NIAID; credit right: modification of work by Tom
Lubbock)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
11.1 The Functions of Genetic Material
11.2 DNA Replication
11.3 RNA Transcription
11.4 Protein Synthesis (Translation)
11.5 Mutations
11.6 How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity
11.7 Gene Regulation: Operon Theory
INTRODUCTION In 1954, French scientist and future Nobel laureate Jacques Monod (1910–1976) famously said,
“What is true in E. coli is true in the elephant,” suggesting that the biochemistry of life was maintained throughout
evolution and is shared in all forms of known life. Since Monod’s famous statement, we have learned a great deal
about the mechanisms of gene regulation, expression, and replication in living cells. All cells use DNA for
information storage, share the same genetic code, and use similar mechanisms to replicate and express it. Although
many aspects of genetics are universally shared, variations do exist among contemporary genetic systems. We now
know that within the shared overall theme of the genetic mechanism, there are significant differences among the
three domains of life: Eukarya, Archaea, and Bacteria. Additionally, viruses, cellular parasites but not themselves
living cells, show dramatic variation in their genetic material and the replication and gene expression processes.
Some of these differences have allowed us to engineer clinical tools such as antibiotics and antiviral drugs that
specifically inhibit the reproduction of pathogens yet are harmless to their hosts.
11.1 The Functions of Genetic Material
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the two functions of the genome
• Explain the meaning of the central dogma of molecular biology
• Differentiate between genotype and phenotype and explain how environmental factors influence
phenotype
=== PDF PAGE 412 ===
398 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 1
Mark is 60-year-old software engineer who suffers from type II diabetes, which he monitors and keeps under
control largely through diet and exercise. One spring morning, while doing some gardening, he scraped his lower
leg while walking through blackberry brambles. He continued working all day in the yard and did not bother to
clean the wound and treat it with antibiotic ointment until later that evening. For the next 2 days, his leg became
increasingly red, swollen, and warm to the touch. It was sore not only on the surface, but deep in the muscle.
After 24 hours, Mark developed a fever and stiffness in the affected leg. Feeling increasingly weak, he called a
neighbor, who drove him to the emergency department.
• Did Mark wait too long to seek medical attention? At what point do his signs and symptoms warrant
seeking medical attention?
• What types of infections or other conditions might be responsible for Mark’s symptoms?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.
DNA serves two essential functions that deal with cellular information. First, DNA is the genetic material responsible
for inheritance and is passed from parent to offspring for all life on earth. To preserve the integrity of this genetic
information, DNA must be replicated with great accuracy, with minimal errors that introduce changes to the DNA
sequence. A genome contains the full complement of DNA within a cell and is organized into smaller, discrete units
called genes that are arranged on chromosomes and plasmids. The second function of DNA is to direct and regulate
the construction of the proteins necessary to a cell for growth and reproduction in a particular cellular environment.
A gene is composed of DNA that is “read” or transcribed to produce an RNA molecule during the process of
transcription. One major type of RNA molecule, called messenger RNA (mRNA), provides the information for the
ribosome to catalyze protein synthesis in a process called translation. The processes of transcription and translation
are collectively referred to as gene expression. Gene expression is the synthesis of a specific protein with a
sequence of amino acids that is encoded in the gene. The flow of genetic information from DNA to RNA to protein is
described by the central dogma (Figure 11.2). This central dogma of molecular biology further elucidates the
mechanism behind Beadle and Tatum’s “one gene-one enzyme” hypothesis (see Using Microorganisms to Discover
the Secrets of Life). Each of the processes of replication, transcription, and translation includes the stages of 1)
initiation, 2) elongation (polymerization), and 3) termination. These stages will be described in more detail in this
chapter.
FIGURE 11.2 The central dogma states that DNA encodes messenger RNA, which, in turn, encodes protein.
A cell’s genotype is the full collection of genes it contains, whereas its phenotype is the set of observable
characteristics that result from those genes. The phenotype is the product of the array of proteins being produced
by the cell at a given time, which is influenced by the cell’s genotype as well as interactions with the cell’s
environment. Genes code for proteins that have functions in the cell. Production of a specific protein encoded by an
individual gene often results in a distinct phenotype for the cell compared with the phenotype without that protein.
For this reason, it is also common to refer to the genotype of an individual gene and its phenotype. Although a cell’s
genotype remains constant, not all genes are used to direct the production of their proteins simultaneously. Cells
carefully regulate expression of their genes, only using genes to make specific proteins when those proteins are
needed (Figure 11.3).
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 413 ===
11.1 • The Functions of Genetic Material 399
FIGURE 11.3 Phenotype is determined by the specific genes within a genotype that are expressed under specific conditions. Although
multiple cells may have the same genotype, they may exhibit a wide range of phenotypes resulting from differences in patterns of gene
expression in response to different environmental conditions.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What are the two functions of DNA?
• Distinguish between the genotype and phenotype of a cell.
• How can cells have the same genotype but differ in their phenotype?
EYE ON ETHICS
Use and Abuse of Genome Data
Why can some humans harbor opportunistic pathogens like Haemophilus influenzae, Staphylococcus aureus, or
Streptococcus pyogenes, in their upper respiratory tracts but remain asymptomatic carriers, while other
individuals become seriously ill when infected? There is evidence suggesting that differences in susceptibility to
infection between patients may be a result, at least in part, of genetic differences between human hosts. For
example, genetic differences in human leukocyte antigens (HLAs) and red blood cell antigens among hosts have
been implicated in different immune responses and resulting disease progression from infection with H.
influenzae.
Because the genetic interplay between pathogen and host may contribute to disease outcomes, understanding
differences in genetic makeup between individuals may be an important clinical tool. Ecological genomics is a
relatively new field that seeks to understand how the genotypes of different organisms interact with each other
in nature. The field answers questions about how gene expression of one organism affects gene expression of
another. Medical applications of ecological genomics will focus on how pathogens interact with specific
individuals, as opposed to humans in general. Such analyses would allow medical professionals to use
knowledge of an individual’s genotype to apply more individualized plans for treatment and prevention of
disease.
With the advent of next-generation sequencing, it is relatively easy to obtain the entire genomic sequences of
1
pathogens; a bacterial genome can be sequenced in as little as a day. The speed and cost of sequencing the
human genome has also been greatly reduced and, already, individuals can submit samples to receive extensive
reports on their personal genetic traits, including ancestry and carrier status for various genetic diseases. As
sequencing technologies progress further, such services will continue to become less expensive, more
extensive, and quicker.
However, as this day quickly approaches, there are many ethical concerns with which society must grapple. For
example, should genome sequencing be a standard practice for everybody? Should it be required by law or by
employers if it will lower health-care costs? If one refuses genome sequencing, do they forfeit their right to
health insurance coverage? For what purposes should the data be used? Who should oversee proper use of
these data? If genome sequencing reveals predisposition to a particular disease, do insurance companies have
the right to increase rates? Will employers treat an employee differently? Knowing that environmental influences
1 D.J. Edwards, K.E. Holt. “Beginner’s Guide to Comparative Bacterial Genome Analysis Using Next-Generation Sequence Data.” Microbial
Informatics and Experimentation 3 no. 1 (2013):2.
=== PDF PAGE 414 ===
400 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
also affect disease development, how should the data on the presence of a particular disease-causing allele in
an individual be used ethically? The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA) currently
prohibits discriminatory practices based on genetic information by both health insurance companies and
employers. However, GINA does not cover life, disability, or long-term care insurance policies. Clearly, all
members of society must continue to engage in conversations about these issues so that such genomic data can
be used to improve health care while simultaneously protecting an individual’s rights.
11.2 DNA Replication
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the meaning of semiconservative DNA replication
• Explain why DNA replication is bidirectional and includes both a leading and lagging strand
• Explain why Okazaki fragments are formed
• Describe the process of DNA replication and the functions of the enzymes involved
• Identify the differences between DNA replication in bacteria and eukaryotes
• Explain the process of rolling circle replication
The elucidation of the structure of the double helix by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953 provided a hint as to
how DNA is copied during the process of replication. Separating the strands of the double helix would provide two
templates for the synthesis of new complementary strands, but exactly how new DNA molecules were constructed
was still unclear. In one model, semiconservative replication, the two strands of the double helix separate during
DNA replication, and each strand serves as a template from which the new complementary strand is copied; after
replication, each double-stranded DNA includes one parental or “old” strand and one “new” strand. There were two
competing models also suggested: conservative and dispersive, which are shown in Figure 11.4.
FIGURE 11.4 There were three models suggested for DNA replication. In the conservative model, parental DNA strands (blue) remained
associated in one DNA molecule while new daughter strands (red) remained associated in newly formed DNA molecules. In the
semiconservative model, parental strands separated and directed the synthesis of a daughter strand, with each resulting DNA molecule
being a hybrid of a parental strand and a daughter strand. In the dispersive model, all resulting DNA strands have regions of double-
stranded parental DNA and regions of double-stranded daughter DNA.
Matthew Meselson (1930–) and Franklin Stahl (1929–) devised an experiment in 1958 to test which of these
models correctly represents DNA replication (Figure 11.5). They grew E. coli for several generations in a medium
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 415 ===
11.2 • DNA Replication 401
containing a “heavy” isotope of nitrogen (15N) that was incorporated into nitrogenous bases and, eventually, into the
DNA. This labeled the parental DNA. The E. coli culture was then shifted into a medium containing 14N and allowed
to grow for one generation. The cells were harvested and the DNA was isolated. The DNA was separated by
ultracentrifugation, during which the DNA formed bands according to its density. DNA grown in 15N would be
expected to form a band at a higher density position than that grown in 14N. Meselson and Stahl noted that after one
generation of growth in 14N, the single band observed was intermediate in position in between DNA of cells grown
exclusively in 15N or 14N. This suggested either a semiconservative or dispersive mode of replication. Some cells
were allowed to grow for one more generation in 14N and spun again. The DNA harvested from cells grown for two
generations in 14N formed two bands: one DNA band was at the intermediate position between 15N and 14N, and
the other corresponded to the band of 14N DNA. These results could only be explained if DNA replicates in a
semiconservative manner. If DNA replication was dispersive, a single purple band positioned closer to the red 1414
would have been observed, as more 14 was added in a dispersive manner to replace 15. Therefore, the other two
models were ruled out. As a result of this experiment, we now know that during DNA replication, each of the two
strands that make up the double helix serves as a template from which new strands are copied. The new strand will
be complementary to the parental or “old” strand. The resulting DNA molecules have the same sequence and are
divided equally into the two daughter cells.
FIGURE 11.5 Meselson and Stahl experimented with E. coli grown first in heavy nitrogen (15N) then in 14N. DNA grown in 15N (blue band)
was heavier than DNA grown in 14N (red band), and sedimented to a lower level on ultracentrifugation. After one round of replication, the
DNA sedimented halfway between the 15N and 14N levels (purple band), ruling out the conservative model of replication. After a second
round of replication, the dispersive model of replication was ruled out. These data supported the semiconservative replication model.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What would have been the conclusion of Meselson and Stahl’s experiment if, after the first generation, they
had found two bands of DNA?
=== PDF PAGE 416 ===
402 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
DNA Replication in Bacteria
DNA replication has been well studied in bacteria primarily because of the small size of the genome and the mutants
that are available. E. coli has 4.6 million base pairs (Mbp) in a single circular chromosome and all of it is replicated in
approximately 42 minutes, starting from a single origin of replication and proceeding around the circle
bidirectionally (i.e., in both directions). This means that approximately 1000 nucleotides are added per second. The
process is quite rapid and occurs with few errors.
DNA replication uses a large number of proteins and enzymes (Table 11.1). One of the key players is the enzyme
DNA polymerase, also known as DNA pol. In bacteria, three main types of DNA polymerases are known: DNA pol I,
DNA pol II, and DNA pol III. It is now known that DNA pol III is the enzyme required for DNA synthesis; DNA pol I
and DNA pol II are primarily required for repair. DNA pol III adds deoxyribonucleotides each complementary to a
nucleotide on the template strand, one by one to the 3’-OH group of the growing DNA chain. The addition of these
nucleotides requires energy. This energy is present in the bonds of three phosphate groups attached to each
nucleotide (a triphosphate nucleotide), similar to how energy is stored in the phosphate bonds of adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) (Figure 11.6). When the bond between the phosphates is broken and diphosphate is released,
the energy released allows for the formation of a covalent phosphodiester bond by dehydration synthesis between
the incoming nucleotide and the free 3’-OH group on the growing DNA strand.
FIGURE 11.6 This structure shows the guanosine triphosphate deoxyribonucleotide that is incorporated into a growing DNA strand by
cleaving the two end phosphate groups from the molecule and transferring the energy to the sugar phosphate bond. The other three
nucleotides form analogous structures.
Initiation
The initiation of replication occurs at specific nucleotide sequence called the origin of replication, where various
proteins bind to begin the replication process. E. coli has a single origin of replication (as do most prokaryotes),
called oriC, on its one chromosome. The origin of replication is approximately 245 base pairs long and is rich in
adenine-thymine (AT) sequences.
Some of the proteins that bind to the origin of replication are important in making single-stranded regions of DNA
accessible for replication. Chromosomal DNA is typically wrapped around histones (in eukaryotes and archaea) or
histone-like proteins (in bacteria), and is supercoiled, or extensively wrapped and twisted on itself. This packaging
makes the information in the DNA molecule inaccessible. However, enzymes called topoisomerases change the
shape and supercoiling of the chromosome. For bacterial DNA replication to begin, the supercoiled chromosome is
relaxed by topoisomerase II, also called DNA gyrase. An enzyme called helicase then separates the DNA strands
by breaking the hydrogen bonds between the nitrogenous base pairs. Recall that AT sequences have fewer hydrogen
bonds and, hence, have weaker interactions than guanine-cytosine (GC) sequences. These enzymes require ATP
hydrolysis. As the DNA opens up, Y-shaped structures called replication forks are formed. Two replication forks are
formed at the origin of replication, allowing for bidirectional replication and formation of a structure that looks like a
bubble when viewed with a transmission electron microscope; as a result, this structure is called a replication
bubble. The DNA near each replication fork is coated with single-stranded binding proteins to prevent the single-
stranded DNA from rewinding into a double helix.
Once single-stranded DNA is accessible at the origin of replication, DNA replication can begin. However, DNA pol III
is able to add nucleotides only in the 5’ to 3’ direction (a new DNA strand can be only extended in this direction).
This is because DNA polymerase requires a free 3’-OH group to which it can add nucleotides by forming a covalent
phosphodiester bond between the 3’-OH end and the 5’ phosphate of the next nucleotide. This also means that it
cannot add nucleotides if a free 3’-OH group is not available, which is the case for a single strand of DNA. The
problem is solved with the help of an RNA sequence that provides the free 3’-OH end. Because this sequence allows
the start of DNA synthesis, it is appropriately called the primer. The primer is five to 10 nucleotides long and
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 417 ===
11.2 • DNA Replication 403
complementary to the parental or template DNA. It is synthesized by RNA primase, which is an RNA polymerase.
Unlike DNA polymerases, RNA polymerases do not need a free 3’-OH group to synthesize an RNA molecule. Now
that the primer provides the free 3’-OH group, DNA polymerase III can now extend this RNA primer, adding DNA
nucleotides one by one that are complementary to the template strand (Figure 11.4).
Elongation
During elongation in DNA replication, the addition of nucleotides occurs at its maximal rate of about 1000
nucleotides per second. DNA polymerase III can only extend in the 5’ to 3’ direction, which poses a problem at the
replication fork. The DNA double helix is antiparallel; that is, one strand is oriented in the 5’ to 3’ direction and the
other is oriented in the 3’ to 5’ direction (see Structure and Function of DNA). During replication, one strand, which is
complementary to the 3’ to 5’ parental DNA strand, is synthesized continuously toward the replication fork because
polymerase can add nucleotides in this direction. This continuously synthesized strand is known as the leading
strand. The other strand, complementary to the 5’ to 3’ parental DNA, grows away from the replication fork, so the
polymerase must move back toward the replication fork to begin adding bases to a new primer, again in the direction
away from the replication fork. It does so until it bumps into the previously synthesized strand and then it moves
back again (Figure 11.7). These steps produce small DNA sequence fragments known as Okazaki fragments, each
separated by RNA primer. Okazaki fragments are named after the Japanese research team and married couple Reiji
and Tsuneko Okazaki, who first discovered them in 1966. The strand with the Okazaki fragments is known as the
lagging strand, and its synthesis is said to be discontinuous.
The leading strand can be extended from one primer alone, whereas the lagging strand needs a new primer for each
of the short Okazaki fragments. The overall direction of the lagging strand will be 3’ to 5’, and that of the leading
strand 5’ to 3’. A protein called the sliding clamp holds the DNA polymerase in place as it continues to add
nucleotides. The sliding clamp is a ring-shaped protein that binds to the DNA and holds the polymerase in place.
Beyond its role in initiation, topoisomerase also prevents the overwinding of the DNA double helix ahead of the
replication fork as the DNA is opening up; it does so by causing temporary nicks in the DNA helix and then resealing
it. As synthesis proceeds, the RNA primers are replaced by DNA. The primers are removed by the exonuclease
activity of DNA polymerase I, and the gaps are filled in. The nicks that remain between the newly synthesized DNA
(that replaced the RNA primer) and the previously synthesized DNA are sealed by the enzyme DNA ligase that
catalyzes the formation of covalent phosphodiester linkage between the 3’-OH end of one DNA fragment and the 5’
phosphate end of the other fragment, stabilizing the sugar-phosphate backbone of the DNA molecule.
=== PDF PAGE 418 ===
404 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
FIGURE 11.7 At the origin of replication, topoisomerase II relaxes the supercoiled chromosome. Two replication forks are formed by the
opening of the double-stranded DNA at the origin, and helicase separates the DNA strands, which are coated by single-stranded binding
proteins to keep the strands separated. DNA replication occurs in both directions. An RNA primer complementary to the parental strand is
synthesized by RNA primase and is elongated by DNA polymerase III through the addition of nucleotides to the 3’-OH end. On the leading
strand, DNA is synthesized continuously, whereas on the lagging strand, DNA is synthesized in short stretches called Okazaki fragments.
RNA primers within the lagging strand are removed by the exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase I, and the Okazaki fragments are joined
by DNA ligase.
Termination
Once the complete chromosome has been replicated, termination of DNA replication must occur. Although much is
known about initiation of replication, less is known about the termination process. Following replication, the
resulting complete circular genomes of prokaryotes are concatenated, meaning that the circular DNA chromosomes
are interlocked and must be separated from each other. This is accomplished through the activity of bacterial
topoisomerase IV, which introduces double-stranded breaks into DNA molecules, allowing them to separate from
each other; the enzyme then reseals the circular chromosomes. The resolution of concatemers is an issue unique to
prokaryotic DNA replication because of their circular chromosomes. Because both bacterial DNA gyrase and
topoisomerase IV are distinct from their eukaryotic counterparts, these enzymes serve as targets for a class of
antimicrobial drugs called quinolones.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 419 ===
11.2 • DNA Replication 405
The Molecular Machinery Involved in Bacterial DNA Replication
Enzyme or Function
Factor
DNA pol I Exonuclease activity removes RNA primer and replaces it with newly synthesized DNA
DNA pol III Main enzyme that adds nucleotides in the 5’ to 3’ direction
Helicase Opens the DNA helix by breaking hydrogen bonds between the nitrogenous bases
Ligase Seals the gaps between the Okazaki fragments on the lagging strand to create one continuous
DNA strand
Primase Synthesizes RNA primers needed to start replication
Single- Bind to single-stranded DNA to prevent hydrogen bonding between DNA strands, reforming
stranded double-stranded DNA
binding
proteins
Sliding clamp Helps hold DNA pol III in place when nucleotides are being added
Topoisomerase Relaxes supercoiled chromosome to make DNA more accessible for the initiation of
II (DNA replication; helps relieve the stress on DNA when unwinding, by causing breaks and then
gyrase) resealing the DNA
Topoisomerase Introduces single-stranded break into concatenated chromosomes to release them from each
IV other, and then reseals the DNA
TABLE 11.1
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Which enzyme breaks the hydrogen bonds holding the two strands of DNA together so that replication can
occur?
• Is it the lagging strand or the leading strand that is synthesized in the direction toward the opening of the
replication fork?
• Which enzyme is responsible for removing the RNA primers in newly replicated bacterial DNA?
DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
Eukaryotic genomes are much more complex and larger than prokaryotic genomes and are typically composed of
multiple linear chromosomes (Table 11.2). The human genome, for example, has 3 billion base pairs per haploid set
of chromosomes, and 6 billion base pairs are inserted during replication. There are multiple origins of replication on
each eukaryotic chromosome (Figure 11.8); the human genome has 30,000 to 50,000 origins of replication. The
rate of replication is approximately 100 nucleotides per second—10 times slower than prokaryotic replication.
=== PDF PAGE 420 ===
406 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
FIGURE 11.8 Eukaryotic chromosomes are typically linear, and each contains multiple origins of replication.
The essential steps of replication in eukaryotes are the same as in prokaryotes. Before replication can start, the DNA
has to be made available as a template. Eukaryotic DNA is highly supercoiled and packaged, which is facilitated by
many proteins, including histones (see Structure and Function of Cellular Genomes). At the origin of replication, a
prereplication complex composed of several proteins, including helicase, forms and recruits other enzymes involved
in the initiation of replication, including topoisomerase to relax supercoiling, single-stranded binding protein, RNA
primase, and DNA polymerase. Following initiation of replication, in a process similar to that found in prokaryotes,
elongation is facilitated by eukaryotic DNA polymerases. The leading strand is continuously synthesized by the
eukaryotic polymerase enzyme pol δ, while the lagging strand is synthesized by pol ε. A sliding clamp protein holds
the DNA polymerase in place so that it does not fall off the DNA. The enzyme ribonuclease H (RNase H), instead of a
DNA polymerase as in bacteria, removes the RNA primer, which is then replaced with DNA nucleotides. The gaps
that remain are sealed by DNA ligase.
Because eukaryotic chromosomes are linear, one might expect that their replication would be more straightforward.
As in prokaryotes, the eukaryotic DNA polymerase can add nucleotides only in the 5’ to 3’ direction. In the leading
strand, synthesis continues until it reaches either the end of the chromosome or another replication fork progressing
in the opposite direction. On the lagging strand, DNA is synthesized in short stretches, each of which is initiated by a
separate primer. When the replication fork reaches the end of the linear chromosome, there is no place to make a
primer for the DNA fragment to be copied at the end of the chromosome. These ends thus remain unpaired and,
over time, they may get progressively shorter as cells continue to divide.
The ends of the linear chromosomes are known as telomeres and consist of noncoding repetitive sequences. The
telomeres protect coding sequences from being lost as cells continue to divide. In humans, a six base-pair
sequence, TTAGGG, is repeated 100 to 1000 times to form the telomere. The discovery of the enzyme telomerase
(Figure 11.9) clarified our understanding of how chromosome ends are maintained. Telomerase contains a catalytic
part and a built-in RNA template. It attaches to the end of the chromosome, and complementary bases to the RNA
template are added on the 3’ end of the DNA strand. Once the 3’ end of the lagging strand template is sufficiently
elongated, DNA polymerase can add the nucleotides complementary to the ends of the chromosomes. In this way,
the ends of the chromosomes are replicated. In humans, telomerase is typically active in germ cells and adult stem
cells; it is not active in adult somatic cells and may be associated with the aging of these cells. Eukaryotic microbes
including fungi and protozoans also produce telomerase to maintain chromosomal integrity. For her discovery of
telomerase and its action, Elizabeth Blackburn (1948–) received the Nobel Prize for Medicine or Physiology in 2009.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 421 ===
11.2 • DNA Replication 407
FIGURE 11.9 In eukaryotes, the ends of the linear chromosomes are maintained by the action of the telomerase enzyme.
Comparison of Bacterial and Eukaryotic Replication
Property Bacteria Eukaryotes
Genome structure Single circular chromosome Multiple linear chromosomes
Number of origins per chromosome Single Multiple
Rate of replication 1000 nucleotides per second 100 nucleotides per second
Telomerase Not present Present
RNA primer removal DNA pol I RNase H
Strand elongation DNA pol III pol δ, pol ε
TABLE 11.2
LINK TO LEARNING
This animation (https://openstax.org/l/22DNAreplicani) compares the process of prokaryotic and eukaryotic DNA
replication.
=== PDF PAGE 422 ===
408 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How does the origin of replication differ between eukaryotes and prokaryotes?
• What polymerase enzymes are responsible for DNA synthesis during eukaryotic replication?
• What is found at the ends of the chromosomes in eukaryotes and why?
DNA Replication of Extrachromosomal Elements: Plasmids and Viruses
To copy their nucleic acids, plasmids and viruses frequently use variations on the pattern of DNA replication
described for prokaryote genomes. For more information on the wide range of viral replication strategies, see The
Viral Life Cycle.
Rolling Circle Replication
Whereas many bacterial plasmids (see Unique Characteristics of Prokaryotic Cells) replicate by a process similar to
that used to copy the bacterial chromosome, other plasmids, several bacteriophages, and some viruses of
eukaryotes use rolling circle replication (Figure 11.10). The circular nature of plasmids and the circularization of
some viral genomes on infection make this possible. Rolling circle replication begins with the enzymatic nicking of
one strand of the double-stranded circular molecule at the double-stranded origin (dso) site. In bacteria, DNA
polymerase III binds to the 3’-OH group of the nicked strand and begins to unidirectionally replicate the DNA using
the un-nicked strand as a template, displacing the nicked strand as it does so. Completion of DNA replication at the
site of the original nick results in full displacement of the nicked strand, which may then recircularize into a single-
stranded DNA molecule. RNA primase then synthesizes a primer to initiate DNA replication at the single-stranded
origin (sso) site of the single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) molecule, resulting in a double-stranded DNA (dsDNA)
molecule identical to the other circular DNA molecule.
FIGURE 11.10 The process of rolling circle replication results in the synthesis of a single new copy of the circular DNA molecule, as shown
here.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Is there a lagging strand in rolling circle replication? Why or why not?
11.3 RNA Transcription
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how RNA is synthesized using DNA as a template
• Distinguish between transcription in prokaryotes and eukaryotes
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 423 ===
11.3 • RNA Transcription 409
During the process of transcription, the information encoded within the DNA sequence of one or more genes is
transcribed into a strand of RNA, also called an RNA transcript. The resulting single-stranded RNA molecule,
composed of ribonucleotides containing the bases adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and uracil (U), acts as a
mobile molecular copy of the original DNA sequence. Transcription in prokaryotes and in eukaryotes requires the
DNA double helix to partially unwind in the region of RNA synthesis. The unwound region is called a transcription
bubble. Transcription of a particular gene always proceeds from one of the two DNA strands that acts as a template,
the so-called antisense strand. The RNA product is complementary to the template strand of DNA and is almost
identical to the nontemplate DNA strand, or the sense strand. The only difference is that in RNA, all of the T
nucleotides are replaced with U nucleotides; during RNA synthesis, U is incorporated when there is an A in the
complementary antisense strand.
Transcription in Bacteria
Bacteria use the same RNA polymerase to transcribe all of their genes. Like DNA polymerase, RNA polymerase
adds nucleotides one by one to the 3’-OH group of the growing nucleotide chain. One critical difference in activity
between DNA polymerase and RNA polymerase is the requirement for a 3’-OH onto which to add nucleotides: DNA
polymerase requires such a 3’-OH group, thus necessitating a primer, whereas RNA polymerase does not. During
transcription, a ribonucleotide complementary to the DNA template strand is added to the growing RNA strand and
a covalent phosphodiester bond is formed by dehydration synthesis between the new nucleotide and the last one
added. In E. coli, RNA polymerase comprises six polypeptide subunits, five of which compose the polymerase core
enzyme responsible for adding RNA nucleotides to a growing strand. The sixth subunit is known as sigma (σ). The σ
factor enables RNA polymerase to bind to a specific promoter, thus allowing for the transcription of various genes.
There are various σ factors that allow for transcription of various genes.
Initiation
The initiation of transcription begins at a promoter, a DNA sequence onto which the transcription machinery binds
and initiates transcription. The nucleotide pair in the DNA double helix that corresponds to the site from which the
first 5’ RNA nucleotide is transcribed is the initiation site. Nucleotides preceding the initiation site are designated
“upstream,” whereas nucleotides following the initiation site are called “downstream” nucleotides. In most cases,
promoters are located just upstream of the genes they regulate. Although promoter sequences vary among bacterial
genomes, a few elements are conserved. At the –10 and –35 positions within the DNA prior to the initiation site
(designated +1), there are two promoter consensus sequences, or regions that are similar across all promoters and
across various bacterial species. The –10 consensus sequence, called the TATA box, is TATAAT. The –35 sequence is
recognized and bound by σ.
Elongation
The elongation in transcription phase begins when the σ subunit dissociates from the polymerase, allowing the
core enzyme to synthesize RNA complementary to the DNA template in a 5’ to 3’ direction at a rate of approximately
40 nucleotides per second. As elongation proceeds, the DNA is continuously unwound ahead of the core enzyme
and rewound behind it (Figure 11.11).
FIGURE 11.11 During elongation, the bacterial RNA polymerase tracks along the DNA template, synthesizes mRNA in the 5’ to 3’ direction,
and unwinds and rewinds the DNA as it is read.
=== PDF PAGE 424 ===
410 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
Termination
Once a gene is transcribed, the bacterial polymerase must dissociate from the DNA template and liberate the newly
made RNA. This is referred to as termination of transcription. The DNA template includes repeated nucleotide
sequences that act as termination signals, causing RNA polymerase to stall and release from the DNA template,
freeing the RNA transcript.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Where does σ factor of RNA polymerase bind DNA to start transcription?
• What occurs to initiate the polymerization activity of RNA polymerase?
• Where does the signal to end transcription come from?
Transcription in Eukaryotes
Prokaryotes and eukaryotes perform fundamentally the same process of transcription, with a few significant
differences (see Table 11.3). Eukaryotes use three different polymerases, RNA polymerases I, II, and III, all
structurally distinct from the bacterial RNA polymerase. Each transcribes a different subset of genes. Interestingly,
archaea contain a single RNA polymerase that is more closely related to eukaryotic RNA polymerase II than to its
bacterial counterpart. Eukaryotic mRNAs are also usually monocistronic, meaning that they each encode only a
single polypeptide, whereas prokaryotic mRNAs of bacteria and archaea are commonly polycistronic, meaning that
they encode multiple polypeptides.
The most important difference between prokaryotes and eukaryotes is the latter’s membrane-bound nucleus, which
influences the ease of use of RNA molecules for protein synthesis. With the genes bound in a nucleus, the
eukaryotic cell must transport protein-encoding RNA molecules to the cytoplasm to be translated. Protein-encoding
primary transcripts, the RNA molecules directly synthesized by RNA polymerase, must undergo several processing
steps to protect these RNA molecules from degradation during the time they are transferred from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm and translated into a protein. For example, eukaryotic mRNAs may last for several hours, whereas the
typical prokaryotic mRNA lasts no more than 5 seconds.
The primary transcript (also called pre-mRNA) is first coated with RNA-stabilizing proteins to protect it from
degradation while it is processed and exported out of the nucleus. The first type of processing begins while the
primary transcript is still being synthesized; a special 7-methylguanosine nucleotide, called the 5’ cap, is added to
the 5’ end of the growing transcript. In addition to preventing degradation, factors involved in subsequent protein
synthesis recognize the cap, which helps initiate translation by ribosomes. Once elongation is complete, another
processing enzyme then adds a string of approximately 200 adenine nucleotides to the 3’ end, called the poly-A
tail. This modification further protects the pre-mRNA from degradation and signals to cellular factors that the
transcript needs to be exported to the cytoplasm.
Eukaryotic genes that encode polypeptides are composed of coding sequences called exons (ex-on signifies that
they are expressed) and intervening sequences called introns (int-ron denotes their intervening role). Transcribed
RNA sequences corresponding to introns do not encode regions of the functional polypeptide and are removed from
the pre-mRNA during processing. It is essential that all of the intron-encoded RNA sequences are completely and
precisely removed from a pre-mRNA before protein synthesis so that the exon-encoded RNA sequences are
properly joined together to code for a functional polypeptide. If the process errs by even a single nucleotide, the
sequences of the rejoined exons would be shifted, and the resulting polypeptide would be nonfunctional. The
process of removing intron-encoded RNA sequences and reconnecting those encoded by exons is called RNA
splicing and is facilitated by the action of a spliceosome containing small nuclear ribonucleo proteins (snRNPs).
Intron-encoded RNA sequences are removed from the pre-mRNA while it is still in the nucleus. Although they are
not translated, introns appear to have various functions, including gene regulation and mRNA transport. On
completion of these modifications, the mature transcript, the mRNA that encodes a polypeptide, is transported out
of the nucleus, destined for the cytoplasm for translation. Introns can be spliced out differently, resulting in various
exons being included or excluded from the final mRNA product. This process is known as alternative splicing. The
advantage of alternative splicing is that different types of mRNA transcripts can be generated, all derived from the
same DNA sequence. In recent years, it has been shown that some archaea also have the ability to splice their pre-
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 425 ===
11.3 • RNA Transcription 411
mRNA.
Comparison of Transcription in Bacteria Versus Eukaryotes
Property Bacteria Eukaryotes
Number of polypeptides encoded per mRNA Monocistronic or polycistronic Exclusively monocistronic
Strand elongation core + σ = holoenzyme RNA polymerases I, II, or III
Addition of 5’ cap No Yes
Addition of 3’ poly-A tail No Yes
Splicing of pre-mRNA No Yes
TABLE 11.3
LINK TO LEARNING
Visualize how mRNA splicing (https://openstax.org/l/22mrnasplice) happens by watching the process in action in
this video. See how introns are removed during RNA splicing (https://openstax.org/l/22rnasplice) here.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• In eukaryotic cells, how is the RNA transcript from a gene for a protein modified after it is transcribed?
• Do exons or introns contain information for protein sequences?
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 2
In the emergency department, a nurse told Mark that he had made a good decision to come to the hospital
because his symptoms indicated an infection that had gotten out of control. Mark’s symptoms had progressed,
with the area of skin affected and the amount of swelling increasing. Within the affected area, a rash had begun,
blistering and small gas pockets underneath the outermost layer of skin had formed, and some of the skin was
becoming gray. Based on the putrid smell of the pus draining from one of the blisters, the rapid progression of
the infection, and the visual appearance of the affected skin, the physician immediately began treatment for
necrotizing fasciitis. Mark’s physician ordered a culture of the fluid draining from the blister and also ordered
blood work, including a white blood cell count.
Mark was admitted to the intensive care unit and began intravenous administration of a broad-spectrum
antibiotic to try to minimize further spread of the infection. Despite antibiotic therapy, Mark’s condition
deteriorated quickly. Mark became confused and dizzy. Within a few hours of his hospital admission, his blood
pressure dropped significantly and his breathing became shallower and more rapid. Additionally, blistering
increased, with the blisters intensifying in color to purplish black, and the wound itself seemed to be progressing
rapidly up Mark’s leg.
• What are possible causative agents of Mark’s necrotizing fasciitis?
• What are some possible explanations for why the antibiotic treatment does not seem to be working?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
=== PDF PAGE 426 ===
412 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
11.4 Protein Synthesis (Translation)
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the genetic code and explain why it is considered almost universal
• Explain the process of translation and the functions of the molecular machinery of translation
• Compare translation in eukaryotes and prokaryotes
The synthesis of proteins consumes more of a cell’s energy than any other metabolic process. In turn, proteins
account for more mass than any other macromolecule of living organisms. They perform virtually every function of a
cell, serving as both functional (e.g., enzymes) and structural elements. The process of translation, or protein
synthesis, the second part of gene expression, involves the decoding by a ribosome of an mRNA message into a
polypeptide product.
The Genetic Code
Translation of the mRNA template converts nucleotide-based genetic information into the “language” of amino
acids to create a protein product. A protein sequence consists of 20 commonly occurring amino acids. Each amino
acid is defined within the mRNA by a triplet of nucleotides called a codon. The relationship between an mRNA
codon and its corresponding amino acid is called the genetic code.
The three-nucleotide code means that there is a total of 64 possible combinations (43, with four different
nucleotides possible at each of the three different positions within the codon). This number is greater than the
number of amino acids and a given amino acid is encoded by more than one codon (Figure 11.12). This redundancy
in the genetic code is called degeneracy. Typically, whereas the first two positions in a codon are important for
determining which amino acid will be incorporated into a growing polypeptide, the third position, called the wobble
position, is less critical. In some cases, if the nucleotide in the third position is changed, the same amino acid is still
incorporated.
Whereas 61 of the 64 possible triplets code for amino acids, three of the 64 codons do not code for an amino acid;
they terminate protein synthesis, releasing the polypeptide from the translation machinery. These are called stop
codons or nonsense codons. Another codon, AUG, also has a special function. In addition to specifying the amino
acid methionine, it also typically serves as the start codon to initiate translation. The reading frame, the way
nucleotides in mRNA are grouped into codons, for translation is set by the AUG start codon near the 5’ end of the
mRNA. Each set of three nucleotides following this start codon is a codon in the mRNA message.
The genetic code is nearly universal. With a few exceptions, virtually all species use the same genetic code for
protein synthesis, which is powerful evidence that all extant life on earth shares a common origin. However, unusual
amino acids such as selenocysteine and pyrrolysine have been observed in archaea and bacteria. In the case of
selenocysteine, the codon used is UGA (normally a stop codon). However, UGA can encode for selenocysteine using
a stem-loop structure (known as the selenocysteine insertion sequence, or SECIS element), which is found at the 3’
untranslated region of the mRNA. Pyrrolysine uses a different stop codon, UAG. The incorporation of pyrrolysine
requires the pylS gene and a unique transfer RNA (tRNA) with a CUA anticodon.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 427 ===
11.4 • Protein Synthesis (Translation) 413
FIGURE 11.12 This figure shows the genetic code for translating each nucleotide triplet in mRNA into an amino acid or a termination signal
in a nascent protein. The first letter of a codon is shown vertically on the left, the second letter of a codon is shown horizontally across the
top, and the third letter of a codon is shown vertically on the right. (credit: modification of work by National Institutes of Health)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How many bases are in each codon?
• What amino acid is coded for by the codon AAU?
• What happens when a stop codon is reached?
The Protein Synthesis Machinery
In addition to the mRNA template, many molecules and macromolecules contribute to the process of translation.
The composition of each component varies across taxa; for instance, ribosomes may consist of different numbers of
ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and polypeptides depending on the organism. However, the general structures and
functions of the protein synthesis machinery are comparable from bacteria to human cells. Translation requires the
input of an mRNA template, ribosomes, tRNAs, and various enzymatic factors.
Ribosomes
A ribosome is a complex macromolecule composed of catalytic rRNAs (called ribozymes) and structural rRNAs, as
well as many distinct polypeptides. Mature rRNAs make up approximately 50% of each ribosome. Prokaryotes have
70S ribosomes, whereas eukaryotes have 80S ribosomes in the cytoplasm and rough endoplasmic reticulum, and
70S ribosomes in mitochondria and chloroplasts. Ribosomes dissociate into large and small subunits when they are
not synthesizing proteins and reassociate during the initiation of translation. In E. coli, the small subunit is
described as 30S (which contains the 16S rRNA subunit), and the large subunit is 50S (which contains the 5S and
23S rRNA subunits), for a total of 70S (Svedberg units are not additive). Eukaryote ribosomes have a small 40S
subunit (which contains the 18S rRNA subunit) and a large 60S subunit (which contains the 5S, 5.8S and 28S rRNA
subunits), for a total of 80S. The small subunit is responsible for binding the mRNA template, whereas the large
subunit binds tRNAs (discussed in the next subsection).
Each mRNA molecule is simultaneously translated by many ribosomes, all synthesizing protein in the same
direction: reading the mRNA from 5’ to 3’ and synthesizing the polypeptide from the N terminus to the C terminus.
The complete structure containing an mRNA with multiple associated ribosomes is called a polyribosome (or
polysome). In both bacteria and archaea, before transcriptional termination occurs, each protein-encoding
transcript is already being used to begin synthesis of numerous copies of the encoded polypeptide(s) because the
processes of transcription and translation can occur concurrently, forming polyribosomes (Figure 11.13). The reason
why transcription and translation can occur simultaneously is because both of these processes occur in the same 5’
=== PDF PAGE 428 ===
414 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
to 3’ direction, they both occur in the cytoplasm of the cell, and because the RNA transcript is not processed once it
is transcribed. This allows a prokaryotic cell to respond to an environmental signal requiring new proteins very
quickly. In contrast, in eukaryotic cells, simultaneous transcription and translation is not possible. Although
polyribosomes also form in eukaryotes, they cannot do so until RNA synthesis is complete and the RNA molecule
has been modified and transported out of the nucleus.
FIGURE 11.13 In prokaryotes, multiple RNA polymerases can transcribe a single bacterial gene while numerous ribosomes concurrently
translate the mRNA transcripts into polypeptides. In this way, a specific protein can rapidly reach a high concentration in the bacterial cell.
Transfer RNAs
Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) are structural RNA molecules and, depending on the species, many different types of tRNAs
exist in the cytoplasm. Bacterial species typically have between 60 and 90 types. Serving as adaptors, each tRNA
type binds to a specific codon on the mRNA template and adds the corresponding amino acid to the polypeptide
chain. Therefore, tRNAs are the molecules that actually “translate” the language of RNA into the language of
proteins. As the adaptor molecules of translation, it is surprising that tRNAs can fit so much specificity into such a
small package. The tRNA molecule interacts with three factors: aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, ribosomes, and
mRNA.
Mature tRNAs take on a three-dimensional structure when complementary bases exposed in the single-stranded
RNA molecule hydrogen bond with each other (Figure 11.14). This shape positions the amino-acid binding site,
called the CCA amino acid binding end, which is a cytosine-cytosine-adenine sequence at the 3’ end of the tRNA,
and the anticodon at the other end. The anticodon is a three-nucleotide sequence that bonds with an mRNA codon
through complementary base pairing.
An amino acid is added to the end of a tRNA molecule through the process of tRNA “charging,” during which each
tRNA molecule is linked to its correct or cognate amino acid by a group of enzymes called aminoacyl tRNA
synthetases. At least one type of aminoacyl tRNA synthetase exists for each of the 20 amino acids. During this
process, the amino acid is first activated by the addition of adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and then transferred to
the tRNA, making it a charged tRNA, and AMP is released.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 429 ===
11.4 • Protein Synthesis (Translation) 415
FIGURE 11.14 (a) After folding caused by intramolecular base pairing, a tRNA molecule has one end that contains the anticodon, which
interacts with the mRNA codon, and the CCA amino acid binding end. (b) A space-filling model is helpful for visualizing the three-
dimensional shape of tRNA. (c) Simplified models are useful when drawing complex processes such as protein synthesis.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Describe the structure and composition of the prokaryotic ribosome.
• In what direction is the mRNA template read?
• Describe the structure and function of a tRNA.
The Mechanism of Protein Synthesis
Translation is similar in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Here we will explore how translation occurs in E. coli, a
representative prokaryote, and specify any differences between bacterial and eukaryotic translation.
Initiation
The initiation of protein synthesis begins with the formation of an initiation complex. In E. coli, this complex
involves the small 30S ribosome, the mRNA template, three initiation factors that help the ribosome assemble
correctly, guanosine triphosphate (GTP) that acts as an energy source, and a special initiator tRNA carrying
N-formyl-methionine (fMet-tRNAfMet) (Figure 11.15). The initiator tRNA interacts with the start codon AUG of the
mRNA and carries a formylated methionine (fMet). Because of its involvement in initiation, fMet is inserted at the
beginning (N terminus) of every polypeptide chain synthesized by E. coli. In E. coli mRNA, a leader sequence
upstream of the first AUG codon, called the Shine-Dalgarno sequence (also known as the ribosomal binding site
AGGAGG), interacts through complementary base pairing with the rRNA molecules that compose the ribosome. This
interaction anchors the 30S ribosomal subunit at the correct location on the mRNA template. At this point, the 50S
ribosomal subunit then binds to the initiation complex, forming an intact ribosome.
In eukaryotes, initiation complex formation is similar, with the following differences:
• The initiator tRNA is a different specialized tRNA carrying methionine, called Met-tRNAi
• Instead of binding to the mRNA at the Shine-Dalgarno sequence, the eukaryotic initiation complex recognizes
the 5’ cap of the eukaryotic mRNA, then tracks along the mRNA in the 5’ to 3’ direction until the AUG start
codon is recognized. At this point, the 60S subunit binds to the complex of Met-tRNAi, mRNA, and the 40S
subunit.
=== PDF PAGE 430 ===
416 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
FIGURE 11.15 Translation in bacteria begins with the formation of the initiation complex, which includes the small ribosomal subunit, the
mRNA, the initiator tRNA carrying N-formyl-methionine, and initiation factors. Then the 50S subunit binds, forming an intact ribosome.
Elongation
In prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the basics of elongation of translation are the same. In E. coli, the binding of the
50S ribosomal subunit to produce the intact ribosome forms three functionally important ribosomal sites: The A
(aminoacyl) site binds incoming charged aminoacyl tRNAs. The P (peptidyl) site binds charged tRNAs carrying
amino acids that have formed peptide bonds with the growing polypeptide chain but have not yet dissociated from
their corresponding tRNA. The E (exit) site releases dissociated tRNAs so that they can be recharged with free
amino acids. There is one notable exception to this assembly line of tRNAs: During initiation complex formation,
bacterial fMet−tRNAfMet or eukaryotic Met-tRNAi enters the P site directly without first entering the A site, providing
a free A site ready to accept the tRNA corresponding to the first codon after the AUG.
Elongation proceeds with single-codon movements of the ribosome each called a translocation event. During each
translocation event, the charged tRNAs enter at the A site, then shift to the P site, and then finally to the E site for
removal. Ribosomal movements, or steps, are induced by conformational changes that advance the ribosome by
three bases in the 3’ direction. Peptide bonds form between the amino group of the amino acid attached to the A-
site tRNA and the carboxyl group of the amino acid attached to the P-site tRNA. The formation of each peptide bond
is catalyzed by peptidyl transferase, an RNA-based ribozyme that is integrated into the 50S ribosomal subunit. The
amino acid bound to the P-site tRNA is also linked to the growing polypeptide chain. As the ribosome steps across
the mRNA, the former P-site tRNA enters the E site, detaches from the amino acid, and is expelled. Several of the
steps during elongation, including binding of a charged aminoacyl tRNA to the A site and translocation, require
energy derived from GTP hydrolysis, which is catalyzed by specific elongation factors. Amazingly, the E. coli
translation apparatus takes only 0.05 seconds to add each amino acid, meaning that a 200 amino-acid protein can
be translated in just 10 seconds.
Termination
The termination of translation occurs when a nonsense codon (UAA, UAG, or UGA) is encountered for which there
is no complementary tRNA. On aligning with the A site, these nonsense codons are recognized by release factors in
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 431 ===
11.4 • Protein Synthesis (Translation) 417
prokaryotes and eukaryotes that result in the P-site amino acid detaching from its tRNA, releasing the newly made
polypeptide. The small and large ribosomal subunits dissociate from the mRNA and from each other; they are
recruited almost immediately into another translation initiation complex.
In summary, there are several key features that distinguish prokaryotic gene expression from that seen in
eukaryotes. These are illustrated in Figure 11.16 and listed in Figure 11.17.
FIGURE 11.16 (a) In prokaryotes, the processes of transcription and translation occur simultaneously in the cytoplasm, allowing for a rapid
cellular response to an environmental cue. (b) In eukaryotes, transcription is localized to the nucleus and translation is localized to the
cytoplasm, separating these processes and necessitating RNA processing for stability.
FIGURE 11.17
Protein Targeting, Folding, and Modification
During and after translation, polypeptides may need to be modified before they are biologically active. Post-
translational modifications include:
1. removal of translated signal sequences—short tails of amino acids that aid in directing a protein to a specific
cellular compartment
2. proper “folding” of the polypeptide and association of multiple polypeptide subunits, often facilitated by
chaperone proteins, into a distinct three-dimensional structure
3. proteolytic processing of an inactive polypeptide to release an active protein component, and
4. various chemical modifications (e.g., phosphorylation, methylation, or glycosylation) of individual amino acids.
=== PDF PAGE 432 ===
418 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What are the components of the initiation complex for translation in prokaryotes?
• What are two differences between initiation of prokaryotic and eukaryotic translation?
• What occurs at each of the three active sites of the ribosome?
• What causes termination of translation?
11.5 Mutations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Compare point mutations and frameshift mutations
• Describe the differences between missense, nonsense, and silent mutations
• Describe the differences between light and dark repair
• Explain how different mutagens act
• Explain why the Ames test can be used to detect carcinogens
• Analyze sequences of DNA and identify examples of types of mutations
A mutation is a heritable change in the DNA sequence of an organism. The resulting organism, called a mutant, may
have a recognizable change in phenotype compared to the wild type, which is the phenotype most commonly
observed in nature. A change in the DNA sequence is conferred to mRNA through transcription, and may lead to an
altered amino acid sequence in a protein on translation. Because proteins carry out the vast majority of cellular
functions, a change in amino acid sequence in a protein may lead to an altered phenotype for the cell and organism.
Effects of Mutations on DNA Sequence
There are several types of mutations that are classified according to how the DNA molecule is altered. One type,
called a point mutation, affects a single base and most commonly occurs when one base is substituted or replaced
by another. Mutations also result from the addition of one or more bases, known as an insertion, or the removal of
one or more bases, known as a deletion.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What type of a mutation occurs when a gene has two fewer nucleotides in its sequence?
Effects of Mutations on Protein Structure and Function
Point mutations may have a wide range of effects on protein function (Figure 11.18). As a consequence of the
degeneracy of the genetic code, a point mutation will commonly result in the same amino acid being incorporated
into the resulting polypeptide despite the sequence change. This change would have no effect on the protein’s
structure, and is thus called a silent mutation. A missense mutation results in a different amino acid being
incorporated into the resulting polypeptide. The effect of a missense mutation depends on how chemically different
the new amino acid is from the wild-type amino acid. The location of the changed amino acid within the protein also
is important. For example, if the changed amino acid is part of the enzyme’s active site, then the effect of the
missense mutation may be significant. Many missense mutations result in proteins that are still functional, at least
to some degree. Sometimes the effects of missense mutations may be only apparent under certain environmental
conditions; such missense mutations are called conditional mutations. Rarely, a missense mutation may be
beneficial. Under the right environmental conditions, this type of mutation may give the organism that harbors it a
selective advantage. Yet another type of point mutation, called a nonsense mutation, converts a codon encoding an
amino acid (a sense codon) into a stop codon (a nonsense codon). Nonsense mutations result in the synthesis of
proteins that are shorter than the wild type and typically not functional.
Deletions and insertions also cause various effects. Because codons are triplets of nucleotides, insertions or
deletions in groups of three nucleotides may lead to the insertion or deletion of one or more amino acids and may
not cause significant effects on the resulting protein’s functionality. However, frameshift mutations, caused by
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 433 ===
11.5 • Mutations 419
insertions or deletions of a number of nucleotides that are not a multiple of three are extremely problematic
because a shift in the reading frame results (Figure 11.18). Because ribosomes read the mRNA in triplet codons,
frameshift mutations can change every amino acid after the point of the mutation. The new reading frame may also
include a stop codon before the end of the coding sequence. Consequently, proteins made from genes containing
frameshift mutations are nearly always nonfunctional.
FIGURE 11.18 Mutations can lead to changes in the protein sequence encoded by the DNA.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What are the reasons a nucleotide change in a gene for a protein might not have any effect on the phenotype
of that gene?
• Is it possible for an insertion of three nucleotides together after the fifth nucleotide in a protein-coding gene to
produce a protein that is shorter than normal? How or how not?
=== PDF PAGE 434 ===
420 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
MICRO CONNECTIONS
A Beneficial Mutation
Since the first case of infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was reported in 1981, nearly 40 million
2
people have died from HIV infection, the virus that causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). The virus
targets helper T cells that play a key role in bridging the innate and adaptive immune response, infecting and killing
cells normally involved in the body’s response to infection. There is no cure for HIV infection, but many drugs have
been developed to slow or block the progression of the virus. Although individuals around the world may be
infected, the highest prevalence among people 15–49 years old is in sub-Saharan Africa, where nearly one person in
3
20 is infected, accounting for greater than 70% of the infections worldwide (Figure 11.19). Unfortunately, this is
also a part of the world where prevention strategies and drugs to treat the infection are the most lacking.
In recent years, scientific interest has been piqued by the discovery of a few individuals from northern Europe who
are resistant to HIV infection. In 1998, American geneticist Stephen J. O’Brien at the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) and colleagues published the results of their genetic analysis of more than 4,000 individuals. These indicated
that many individuals of Eurasian descent (up to 14% in some ethnic groups) have a deletion mutation, called
CCR5-delta 32, in the gene encoding CCR5. CCR5 is a coreceptor found on the surface of T cells that is necessary for
many strains of the virus to enter the host cell. The mutation leads to the production of a receptor to which HIV
cannot effectively bind and thus blocks viral entry. People homozygous for this mutation have greatly reduced
susceptibility to HIV infection, and those who are heterozygous have some protection from infection as well.
It is not clear why people of northern European descent, specifically, carry this mutation, but its prevalence seems
to be highest in northern Europe and steadily decreases in populations as one moves south. Research indicates that
the mutation has been present since before HIV appeared and may have been selected for in European populations
as a result of exposure to the plague or smallpox. This mutation may protect individuals from plague (caused by the
bacterium Yersinia pestis) and smallpox (caused by the variola virus) because this receptor may also be involved in
these diseases. The age of this mutation is a matter of debate, but estimates suggest it appeared between 1875
years to 225 years ago, and may have been spread from Northern Europe through Viking invasions.
This exciting finding has led to new avenues in HIV research, including looking for drugs to block CCR5 binding to
HIV in individuals who lack the mutation. Although DNA testing to determine which individuals carry the CCR5-delta
32 mutation is possible, there are documented cases of individuals homozygous for the mutation contracting HIV.
For this reason, DNA testing for the mutation is not widely recommended by public health officials so as not to
encourage risky behavior in those who carry the mutation. Nevertheless, inhibiting the binding of HIV to CCR5
continues to be a valid strategy for the development of drug therapies for those infected with HIV.
2 World Health Organization. “ Global Health Observatory (GHO) Data, HIV/AIDS.” http://www.who.int/gho/hiv/en/. Accessed August 5,
2016.
3 World Health Organization. “ Global Health Observatory (GHO) Data, HIV/AIDS.” http://www.who.int/gho/hiv/en/. Accessed August 5,
2016.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 435 ===
11.5 • Mutations 421
FIGURE 11.19 HIV is highly prevalent in sub-Saharan Africa, but its prevalence is quite low in some other parts of the world.
Causes of Mutations
Mistakes in the process of DNA replication can cause spontaneous mutations to occur. The error rate of DNA
polymerase is one incorrect base per billion base pairs replicated. Exposure to mutagens can cause induced
mutations, which are various types of chemical agents or radiation (Table 11.4). Exposure to a mutagen can
increase the rate of mutation more than 1000-fold. Mutagens are often also carcinogens, agents that cause cancer.
However, whereas nearly all carcinogens are mutagenic, not all mutagens are necessarily carcinogens.
Chemical Mutagens
Various types of chemical mutagens interact directly with DNA either by acting as nucleoside analogs or by
modifying nucleotide bases. Chemicals called nucleoside analogs are structurally similar to normal nucleotide
bases and can be incorporated into DNA during replication (Figure 11.20). These base analogs induce mutations
because they often have different base-pairing rules than the bases they replace. Other chemical mutagens can
modify normal DNA bases, resulting in different base-pairing rules. For example, nitrous acid deaminates cytosine,
converting it to uracil. Uracil then pairs with adenine in a subsequent round of replication, resulting in the conversion
of a GC base pair to an AT base pair. Nitrous acid also deaminates adenine to hypoxanthine, which base pairs with
cytosine instead of thymine, resulting in the conversion of a TA base pair to a CG base pair.
Chemical mutagens known as intercalating agents work differently. These molecules slide between the stacked
nitrogenous bases of the DNA double helix, distorting the molecule and creating atypical spacing between
nucleotide base pairs (Figure 11.21). As a result, during DNA replication, DNA polymerase may either skip
replicating several nucleotides (creating a deletion) or insert extra nucleotides (creating an insertion). Either
outcome may lead to a frameshift mutation. Combustion products like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are
particularly dangerous intercalating agents that can lead to mutation-caused cancers. The intercalating agents
ethidium bromide and acridine orange are commonly used in the laboratory to stain DNA for visualization and are
potential mutagens.
=== PDF PAGE 436 ===
422 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
FIGURE 11.20 (a) 2-aminopurine nucleoside (2AP) structurally is a nucleoside analog to adenine nucleoside, whereas 5-bromouracil (5BU)
is a nucleoside analog to thymine nucleoside. 2AP base pairs with C, converting an AT base pair to a GC base pair after several rounds of
replication. 5BU pairs with G, converting an AT base pair to a GC base pair after several rounds of replication. (b) Nitrous acid is a different
type of chemical mutagen that modifies already existing nucleoside bases like C to produce U, which base pairs with A. This chemical
modification, as shown here, results in converting a CG base pair to a TA base pair.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 437 ===
11.5 • Mutations 423
FIGURE 11.21 Intercalating agents, such as acridine, introduce atypical spacing between base pairs, resulting in DNA polymerase
introducing either a deletion or an insertion, leading to a potential frameshift mutation.
Radiation
Exposure to either ionizing or nonionizing radiation can each induce mutations in DNA, although by different
mechanisms. Strong ionizing radiation like X-rays and gamma rays can cause single- and double-stranded breaks
in the DNA backbone through the formation of hydroxyl radicals on radiation exposure (Figure 11.22). Ionizing
radiation can also modify bases; for example, the deamination of cytosine to uracil, analogous to the action of
4
nitrous acid. Ionizing radiation exposure is used to kill microbes to sterilize medical devices and foods, because of
its dramatic nonspecific effect in damaging DNA, proteins, and other cellular components (see Using Physical
Methods to Control Microorganisms).
Nonionizing radiation, like ultraviolet light, is not energetic enough to initiate these types of chemical changes.
However, nonionizing radiation can induce dimer formation between two adjacent pyrimidine bases, commonly
two thymines, within a nucleotide strand. During thymine dimer formation, the two adjacent thymines become
covalently linked and, if left unrepaired, both DNA replication and transcription are stalled at this point. DNA
polymerase may proceed and replicate the dimer incorrectly, potentially leading to frameshift or point mutations.
FIGURE 11.22 (a) Ionizing radiation may lead to the formation of single-stranded and double-stranded breaks in the sugar-phosphate
backbone of DNA, as well as to the modification of bases (not shown). (b) Nonionizing radiation like ultraviolet light can lead to the
formation of thymine dimers, which can stall replication and transcription and introduce frameshift or point mutations.
4 K.R. Tindall et al. “Changes in DNA Base Sequence Induced by Gamma-Ray Mutagenesis of Lambda Phage and Prophage.” Genetics 118
no. 4 (1988):551–560.
=== PDF PAGE 438 ===
424 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
A Summary of Mutagenic Agents
Mutagenic Agents Mode of Action Effect on DNA Resulting Type of
Mutation
Nucleoside analogs
2-aminopurine Is inserted in place of A but Converts AT to GC Point
base pairs with C base pair
5-bromouracil Is inserted in place of T but Converts AT to GC Point
base pairs with G base pair
Nucleotide-modifying agent
Nitrous oxide Deaminates C to U Converts GC to AT Point
base pair
Intercalating agents
Acridine orange, ethidium Distorts double helix, creates Introduces small Frameshift
bromide, polycyclic aromatic unusual spacing between deletions and
hydrocarbons nucleotides insertions
Ionizing radiation
X-rays, γ-rays Forms hydroxyl radicals Causes single- and Repair mechanisms
double-strand DNA may introduce
breaks mutations
X-rays, γ-rays Modifies bases (e.g., Converts GC to AT Point
deaminating C to U) base pair
Nonionizing radiation
Ultraviolet Forms pyrimidine (usually Causes DNA Frameshift or point
thymine) dimers replication errors
TABLE 11.4
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How does a base analog introduce a mutation?
• How does an intercalating agent introduce a mutation?
• What type of mutagen causes thymine dimers?
DNA Repair
The process of DNA replication is highly accurate, but mistakes can occur spontaneously or be induced by
mutagens. Uncorrected mistakes can lead to serious consequences for the phenotype. Cells have developed several
repair mechanisms to minimize the number of mutations that persist.
Proofreading
Most of the mistakes introduced during DNA replication are promptly corrected by most DNA polymerases through a
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 439 ===
11.5 • Mutations 425
function called proofreading. In proofreading, the DNA polymerase reads the newly added base, ensuring that it is
complementary to the corresponding base in the template strand before adding the next one. If an incorrect base
has been added, the enzyme makes a cut to release the wrong nucleotide and a new base is added.
Mismatch Repair
Some errors introduced during replication are corrected shortly after the replication machinery has moved. This
mechanism is called mismatch repair. The enzymes involved in this mechanism recognize the incorrectly added
nucleotide, excise it, and replace it with the correct base. One example is the methyl-directed mismatch repair in E.
coli. The DNA is hemimethylated. This means that the parental strand is methylated while the newly synthesized
daughter strand is not. It takes several minutes before the new strand is methylated. Proteins MutS, MutL, and MutH
bind to the hemimethylated site where the incorrect nucleotide is found. MutH cuts the nonmethylated strand (the
new strand). An exonuclease removes a portion of the strand (including the incorrect nucleotide). The gap formed is
then filled in by DNA pol III and ligase.
Repair of Thymine Dimers
Because the production of thymine dimers is common (many organisms cannot avoid ultraviolet light), mechanisms
have evolved to repair these lesions. In nucleotide excision repair (also called dark repair), enzymes remove the
pyrimidine dimer and replace it with the correct nucleotides (Figure 11.23). In E. coli, the DNA is scanned by an
enzyme complex. If a distortion in the double helix is found that was introduced by the pyrimidine dimer, the
enzyme complex cuts the sugar-phosphate backbone several bases upstream and downstream of the dimer, and
the segment of DNA between these two cuts is then enzymatically removed. DNA pol I replaces the missing
nucleotides with the correct ones and DNA ligase seals the gap in the sugar-phosphate backbone.
The direct repair (also called light repair) of thymine dimers occurs through the process of photoreactivation in the
presence of visible light. An enzyme called photolyase recognizes the distortion in the DNA helix caused by the
thymine dimer and binds to the dimer. Then, in the presence of visible light, the photolyase enzyme changes
conformation and breaks apart the thymine dimer, allowing the thymines to again correctly base pair with the
adenines on the complementary strand. Photoreactivation appears to be present in all organisms, with the
exception of placental mammals, including humans. Photoreactivation is particularly important for organisms
chronically exposed to ultraviolet radiation, like plants, photosynthetic bacteria, algae, and corals, to prevent the
accumulation of mutations caused by thymine dimer formation.
=== PDF PAGE 440 ===
426 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
FIGURE 11.23 Bacteria have two mechanisms for repairing thymine dimers. (a) In nucleotide excision repair, an enzyme complex
recognizes the distortion in the DNA complex around the thymine dimer and cuts and removes the damaged DNA strand. The correct
nucleotides are replaced by DNA pol I and the nucleotide strand is sealed by DNA ligase. (b) In photoreactivation, the enzyme photolyase
binds to the thymine dimer and, in the presence of visible light, breaks apart the dimer, restoring the base pairing of the thymines with
complementary adenines on the opposite DNA strand.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• During mismatch repair, how does the enzyme recognize which is the new and which is the old strand?
• What type of mutation does photolyase repair?
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 441 ===
11.5 • Mutations 427
Identifying Bacterial Mutants
One common technique used to identify bacterial mutants is called replica plating. This technique is used to detect
nutritional mutants, called auxotrophs, which have a mutation in a gene encoding an enzyme in the biosynthesis
pathway of a specific nutrient, such as an amino acid. As a result, whereas wild-type cells retain the ability to grow
normally on a medium lacking the specific nutrient, auxotrophs are unable to grow on such a medium. During replica
plating (Figure 11.24), a population of bacterial cells is mutagenized and then plated as individual cells on a
complex nutritionally complete plate and allowed to grow into colonies. Cells from these colonies are removed from
this master plate, often using sterile velvet. This velvet, containing cells, is then pressed in the same orientation onto
plates of various media. At least one plate should also be nutritionally complete to ensure that cells are being
properly transferred between the plates. The other plates lack specific nutrients, allowing the researcher to discover
various auxotrophic mutants unable to produce specific nutrients. Cells from the corresponding colony on the
nutritionally complete plate can be used to recover the mutant for further study.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Why are cells plated on a nutritionally complete plate in addition to nutrient-deficient plates when looking for
a mutant?
The Ames Test
The Ames test, developed by Bruce Ames (1928–) in the 1970s, is a method that uses bacteria for rapid,
inexpensive screening of the carcinogenic potential of new chemical compounds. The test measures the mutation
rate associated with exposure to the compound, which, if elevated, may indicate that exposure to this compound is
associated with greater cancer risk. The Ames test uses as the test organism a strain of Salmonella typhimurium
that is a histidine auxotroph, unable to synthesize its own histidine because of a mutation in an essential gene
required for its synthesis. After exposure to a potential mutagen, these bacteria are plated onto a medium lacking
histidine, and the number of mutants regaining the ability to synthesize histidine is recorded and compared with the
number of such mutants that arise in the absence of the potential mutagen (Figure 11.25). Chemicals that are more
mutagenic will bring about more mutants with restored histidine synthesis in the Ames test. Because many
chemicals are not directly mutagenic but are metabolized to mutagenic forms by liver enzymes, rat liver extract is
commonly included at the start of this experiment to mimic liver metabolism. After the Ames test is conducted,
compounds identified as mutagenic are further tested for their potential carcinogenic properties by using other
models, including animal models like mice and rats.
FIGURE 11.24 Identification of auxotrophic mutants, like histidine auxotrophs, is done using replica plating. After mutagenesis, colonies
=== PDF PAGE 442 ===
428 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
that grow on nutritionally complete medium but not on medium lacking histidine are identified as histidine auxotrophs.
FIGURE 11.25 The Ames test is used to identify mutagenic, potentially carcinogenic chemicals. A Salmonella histidine auxotroph is used as
the test strain, exposed to a potential mutagen/carcinogen. The number of reversion mutants capable of growing in the absence of supplied
histidine is counted and compared with the number of natural reversion mutants that arise in the absence of the potential mutagen.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What mutation is used as an indicator of mutation rate in the Ames test?
• Why can the Ames test work as a test for carcinogenicity?
11.6 How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Compare the processes of transformation, transduction, and conjugation
• Explain how asexual gene transfer results in prokaryotic genetic diversity
• Explain the structure and consequences for bacterial genetic diversity of transposons
Typically, when we consider genetic transfer, we think of vertical gene transfer, the transmission of genetic
information from generation to generation. Vertical gene transfer is by far the main mode of transmission of genetic
information in all cells. In sexually reproducing organisms, crossing-over events and independent assortment of
individual chromosomes during meiosis contribute to genetic diversity in the population. Genetic diversity is also
introduced during sexual reproduction, when the genetic information from two parents, each with different
complements of genetic information, are combined, producing new combinations of parental genotypes in the
diploid offspring. The occurrence of mutations also contributes to genetic diversity in a population. Genetic diversity
of offspring is useful in changing or inconsistent environments and may be one reason for the evolutionary success
of sexual reproduction.
When prokaryotes and eukaryotes reproduce asexually, they transfer a nearly identical copy of their genetic material
to their offspring through vertical gene transfer. Although asexual reproduction produces more offspring more
quickly, any benefits of diversity among those offspring are lost. How then do organisms whose dominant
reproductive mode is asexual create genetic diversity? In prokaryotes, horizontal gene transfer (HGT), the
introduction of genetic material from one organism to another organism within the same generation, is an important
way to introduce genetic diversity. HGT allows even distantly related species to share genes, influencing their
phenotypes. It is thought that HGT is more prevalent in prokaryotes but that only a small fraction of the prokaryotic
genome may be transferred by this type of transfer at any one time. As the phenomenon is investigated more
thoroughly, it may be revealed to be even more common. Many scientists believe that HGT and mutation are
significant sources of genetic variation, the raw material for the process of natural selection, in prokaryotes.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 443 ===
11.6 • How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity 429
Although HGT is more common among evolutionarily related organisms, it may occur between any two species that
live together in a natural community.
HGT in prokaryotes is known to occur by the three primary mechanisms that are illustrated in Figure 11.26:
1. Transformation: naked DNA is taken up from the environment
2. Transduction: genes are transferred between cells in a virus (see The Viral Life Cycle)
3. Conjugation: use of a hollow tube called a conjugation pilus to transfer genes between cells
FIGURE 11.26 There are three prokaryote-specific mechanisms leading to horizontal gene transfer in prokaryotes. a) In transformation, the
cell takes up DNA directly from the environment. The DNA may remain separate as a plasmid or be incorporated into the host genome. b) In
transduction, a bacteriophage injects DNA that is a hybrid of viral DNA and DNA from a previously infected bacterial cell. c) In conjugation,
DNA is transferred between cells through a cytoplasmic bridge after a conjugation pilus draws the two cells close enough to form the
bridge.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What are three ways sexual reproduction introduces genetic variation into offspring?
• What is a benefit of asexual reproduction?
• What are the three mechanisms of horizontal gene transfer in prokaryotes?
Transformation
Frederick Griffith was the first to demonstrate the process of transformation. In 1928, he showed that live,
nonpathogenic Streptococcus pneumoniae bacteria could be transformed into pathogenic bacteria through
exposure to a heat-killed pathogenic strain. He concluded that some sort of agent, which he called the
“transforming principle,” had been passed from the dead pathogenic bacteria to the live, nonpathogenic bacteria. In
1944, Oswald Avery (1877–1955), Colin MacLeod (1909–1972), and Maclyn McCarty (1911–2005) demonstrated
that the transforming principle was DNA (see Using Microorganisms to Discover the Secrets of Life).
In transformation, the prokaryote takes up naked DNA found in its environment and that is derived from other cells
that have lysed on death and released their contents, including their genome, into the environment. Many bacteria
are naturally competent, meaning that they actively bind to environmental DNA, transport it across their cell
envelopes into their cytoplasm, and make it single stranded. Typically, double-stranded foreign DNA within cells is
destroyed by nucleases as a defense against viral infection. However, these nucleases are usually ineffective against
single-stranded DNA, so this single-stranded DNA within the cell has the opportunity to recombine into the bacterial
genome. A molecule of DNA that contains fragments of DNA from different organisms is called recombinant DNA.
(Recombinant DNA will be discussed in more detail in Microbes and the Tools of Genetic Engineering.) If the
bacterium incorporates the new DNA into its own genome through recombination, the bacterial cell may gain new
phenotypic properties. For example, if a nonpathogenic bacterium takes up DNA for a toxin gene from a pathogen
and then incorporates it into its chromosome, it, too, may become pathogenic. Plasmid DNA may also be taken up
by competent bacteria and confer new properties to the cell. Overall, transformation in nature is a relatively
=== PDF PAGE 444 ===
430 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
inefficient process because environmental DNA levels are low because of the activity of nucleases that are also
released during cellular lysis. Additionally, genetic recombination is inefficient at incorporating new DNA sequences
into the genome.
In nature, bacterial transformation is an important mechanism for the acquisition of genetic elements encoding
virulence factors and antibiotic resistance. Genes encoding resistance to antimicrobial compounds have been
shown to be widespread in nature, even in environments not influenced by humans. These genes, which allow
microbes living in mixed communities to compete for limited resources, can be transferred within a population by
transformation, as well as by the other processes of HGT. In the laboratory, we can exploit the natural process of
bacterial transformation for genetic engineering to make a wide variety of medicinal products, as discussed in
Microbes and the Tools of Genetic Engineering.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Why does a bacterial cell make environmental DNA brought into the cell into a single-stranded form?
Transduction
Viruses that infect bacteria (bacteriophages) may also move short pieces of chromosomal DNA from one bacterium
to another in a process called transduction (see Figure 6.9). Recall that in generalized transduction, any piece of
chromosomal DNA may be transferred to a new host cell by accidental packaging of chromosomal DNA into a phage
head during phage assembly. By contrast, specialized transduction results from the imprecise excision of a lysogenic
prophage from the bacterial chromosome such that it carries with it a piece of the bacterial chromosome from either
side of the phage’s integration site to a new host cell. As a result, the host may acquire new properties. This process
is called lysogenic conversion. Of medical significance, a lysogenic phage may carry with it a virulence gene to its
new host. Once inserted into the new host’s chromosome, the new host may gain pathogenicity. Several pathogenic
bacteria, including Corynebacterium diphtheriae (the causative agent of diphtheria) and Clostridium botulinum (the
causative agent of botulism), are virulent because of the introduction of toxin-encoding genes by lysogenic
bacteriophages, affirming the clinical relevance of transduction in the exchange of genes involved in infectious
disease. Archaea have their own viruses that translocate genetic material from one individual to another.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What is the agent of transduction of prokaryotic cells?
• In specialized transduction, where does the transducing piece of DNA come from?
CASE IN POINT
The Clinical Consequences of Transduction
Paul, a 23-year-old relief worker from Atlanta, traveled to Haiti in 2011 to provide aid following the 2010
earthquake. After working there for several weeks, he suddenly began experiencing abdominal distress,
including severe cramping, nausea, vomiting, and watery diarrhea. He also began to experience intense muscle
cramping. At a local clinic, the physician suspected that Paul’s symptoms were caused by cholera because there
had been a cholera outbreak after the earthquake. Because cholera is transmitted by the fecal-oral route,
breaches in sanitation infrastructure, such as often occur following natural disasters, may precipitate outbreaks.
The physician confirmed the presumptive diagnosis using a cholera dipstick test. He then prescribed Paul a
single dose of doxycycline, as well as oral rehydration salts, instructing him to drink significant amounts of clean
water.
Cholera is caused by the gram-negative curved rod Vibrio cholerae (Figure 11.27). Its symptoms largely result
from the production of the cholera toxin (CT), which ultimately activates a chloride transporter to pump chloride
ions out of the epithelial cells into the gut lumen. Water then follows the chloride ions, causing the prolific
watery diarrhea characteristic of cholera. The gene encoding the cholera toxin is incorporated into the bacterial
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 445 ===
11.6 • How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity 431
chromosome of V. cholerae through infection of the bacterium with the lysogenic filamentous CTX phage, which
carries the CT gene and introduces it into the chromosome on integration of the prophage. Thus, pathogenic
strains of V. cholerae result from horizontal gene transfer by specialized transduction.
• Why are outbreaks of cholera more common as a result of a natural disaster?
• Why is muscle cramping a common symptom of cholera? Why is treatment with oral rehydration salts so
important for the treatment of cholera?
• In areas stricken by cholera, what are some strategies that people could use to prevent disease
transmission?
FIGURE 11.27 A scanning electron micrograph of Vibrio cholerae shows its characteristic curved rod shape.
Conjugation
In conjugation, DNA is directly transferred from one prokaryote to another by means of a conjugation pilus, which
brings the organisms into contact with one another. In E. coli, the genes encoding the ability to conjugate are located
on a bacterial plasmid called the F plasmid, also known as the fertility factor, and the conjugation pilus is called
the F pilus. The F-plasmid genes encode both the proteins composing the F pilus and those involved in rolling circle
replication of the plasmid. Cells containing the F plasmid, capable of forming an F pilus, are called F+ cells or donor
cells, and those lacking an F plasmid are called F− cells or recipient cells.
Conjugation of the F Plasmid
During typical conjugation in E. coli, the F pilus of an F+ cell comes into contact with an F– cell and retracts, bringing
the two cell envelopes into contact (Figure 11.28). Then a cytoplasmic bridge forms between the two cells at the
site of the conjugation pilus. As rolling circle replication of the F plasmid occurs in the F+ cell, a single-stranded copy
of the F plasmid is transferred through the cytoplasmic bridge to the F− cell, which then synthesizes the
complementary strand, making it double stranded. The F− cell now becomes an F+ cell capable of making its own
conjugation pilus. Eventually, in a mixed bacterial population containing both F+ and F− cells, all cells will become F+
cells. Genes on the E. coli F plasmid also encode proteins preventing conjugation between F+ cells.
=== PDF PAGE 446 ===
432 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
FIGURE 11.28 Typical conjugation of the F plasmid from an F+ cell to an F− cell is brought about by the conjugation pilus bringing the two
cells into contact. A single strand of the F plasmid is transferred to the F− cell, which is then made double stranded.
Conjugation of F’ and Hfr Cells
Although typical conjugation in E. coli results in the transfer of the F-plasmid DNA only, conjugation may also
transfer chromosomal DNA. This is because the F plasmid occasionally integrates into the bacterial chromosome
through recombination between the plasmid and the chromosome, forming an Hfr cell (Figure 11.29). “Hfr” refers
to the high frequency of recombination seen when recipient F− cells receive genetic information from Hfr cells
through conjugation. Similar to the imprecise excision of a prophage during specialized transduction, the integrated
F plasmid may also be imprecisely excised from the chromosome, producing an F’ plasmid that carries with it some
chromosomal DNA adjacent to the integration site. On conjugation, this DNA is introduced to the recipient cell and
may be either maintained as part of the F’ plasmid or be recombined into the recipient cell’s bacterial chromosome.
Hfr cells may also treat the bacterial chromosome like an enormous F plasmid and attempt to transfer a copy of it to
a recipient F− cell. Because the bacterial chromosome is so large, transfer of the entire chromosome takes a long
time (Figure 11.30). However, contact between bacterial cells during conjugation is transient, so it is unusual for the
entire chromosome to be transferred. Host chromosomal DNA near the integration site of the F plasmid, displaced
by the unidirectional process of rolling circle replication, is more likely to be transferred and recombined into a
recipient cell’s chromosome than host genes farther away. Thus, the relative location of bacterial genes on the Hfr
cell’s genome can be mapped based on when they are transferred through conjugation. As a result, prior to the age
of widespread bacterial genome sequencing, distances on prokaryotic genome maps were often measured in
minutes.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 447 ===
11.6 • How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve Genetic Diversity 433
FIGURE 11.29 (a) The F plasmid can occasionally integrate into the bacterial chromosome, producing an Hfr cell. (b) Imprecise excision of
the F plasmid from the chromosome of an Hfr cell may lead to the production of an F’ plasmid that carries chromosomal DNA adjacent to
the integration site. This F’ plasmid can be transferred to an F− cell by conjugation.
FIGURE 11.30 (a) An Hfr cell may attempt to transfer the entire bacterial chromosome to an F− cell, treating the chromosome like an
extremely large F plasmid. However, contact between cells during conjugation is temporary. Chromosomal genes closest to the integration
site (gene 1) that are first displaced during rolling circle replication will be transferred more quickly than genes far away from the
integration site (gene 4). Hence, they are more likely to be recombined into the recipient F− cell’s chromosome. (b) The time it takes for a
gene to be transferred, as detected by recombination into the F− cell’s chromosome, can be used to generate a map of the bacterial
genome, such as this genomic map of E. coli. Note that it takes approximately 100 minutes for the entire genome (4.6 Mbp) of an Hfr strain
of E. coli to be transferred by conjugation.
Consequences and Applications of Conjugation
Plasmids are an important type of extrachromosomal DNA element in bacteria and, in those cells that harbor them,
are considered to be part of the bacterial genome. From a clinical perspective, plasmids often code for genes
involved in virulence. For example, genes encoding proteins that make a bacterial cell resistant to a particular
antibiotic are encoded on R plasmids. R plasmids, in addition to their genes for antimicrobial resistance, contain
genes that control conjugation and transfer of the plasmid. R plasmids are able to transfer between cells of the
same species and between cells of different species. Single R plasmids commonly contain multiple genes conferring
resistance to multiple antibiotics.
Genes required for the production of various toxins and molecules important for colonization during infection may
also be found encoded on plasmids. For example, verotoxin-producing strains of E. coli (VTEC) appear to have
acquired the genes encoding the Shiga toxin from its gram-negative relative Shigella dysenteriae through the
acquisition of a large plasmid encoding this toxin. VTEC causes severe diarrheal disease that may result in hemolytic
uremic syndrome (HUS), which may be lead to kidney failure and death.
In nonclinical settings, bacterial genes that encode metabolic enzymes needed to degrade specialized atypical
compounds like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are also frequently encoded on plasmids. Additionally,
certain plasmids have the ability to move from bacterial cells to other cell types, like those of plants and animals,
through mechanisms distinct from conjugation. Such mechanisms and their use in genetic engineering are covered
=== PDF PAGE 448 ===
434 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
in Modern Applications of Microbial Genetics.
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch this animation (https://openstax.org/l/22conjuganim) to learn more about the process of conjugation.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What type of replication occurs during conjugation?
• What occurs to produce an Hfr E. coli cell?
• What types of traits are encoded on plasmids?
Transposition
Genetic elements called transposons (transposable elements), or “jumping genes,” are molecules of DNA that
include special inverted repeat sequences at their ends and a gene encoding the enzyme transposase (Figure
11.31). Transposons allow the entire sequence to independently excise from one location in a DNA molecule and
integrate into the DNA elsewhere through a process called transposition. Transposons were originally discovered in
maize (corn) by American geneticist Barbara McClintock (1902–1992) in the 1940s. Transposons have since been
found in all types of organisms, both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Thus, unlike the three previous mechanisms
discussed, transposition is not prokaryote-specific. Most transposons are nonreplicative, meaning they move in a
“cut-and-paste” fashion. Some may be replicative, however, retaining their location in the DNA while making a copy
to be inserted elsewhere (“copy and paste”). Because transposons can move within a DNA molecule, from one DNA
molecule to another, or even from one cell to another, they have the ability to introduce genetic diversity. Movement
within the same DNA molecule can alter phenotype by inactivating or activating a gene.
Transposons may carry with them additional genes, moving these genes from one location to another with them. For
example, bacterial transposons can relocate antibiotic resistance genes, moving them from chromosomes to
plasmids. This mechanism has been shown to be responsible for the colocalization of multiple antibiotic resistance
genes on a single R plasmid in Shigella strains causing bacterial dysentery. Such an R plasmid can then be easily
transferred among a bacterial population through the process of conjugation.
FIGURE 11.31 Transposons are segments of DNA that have the ability to move from one location to another because they code for the
enzyme transposase. In this example, a nonreplicative transposon has disrupted gene B. The consequence of that the transcription of gene
B may now have been interrupted.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What are two ways a transposon can affect the phenotype of a cell it moves to?
Table 11.5 summarizes the processes discussed in this section.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 449 ===
11.7 • Gene Regulation: Operon Theory 435
Summary of Mechanisms of Genetic Diversity in Prokaryotes
Term Definition
Conjugation Transfer of DNA through direct contact using a conjugation pilus
Transduction Mechanism of horizontal gene transfer in bacteria in which genes are transferred through viral
infection
Transformation Mechanism of horizontal gene transfer in which naked environmental DNA is taken up by a
bacterial cell
Transposition Process whereby DNA independently excises from one location in a DNA molecule and
integrates elsewhere
TABLE 11.5
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 3
Despite continued antibiotic treatment, Mark’s infection continued to progress rapidly. The infected region
continued to expand, and he had to be put on a ventilator to help him breathe. Mark’s physician ordered surgical
removal of the infected tissue. Following an initial surgery, Mark’s wound was monitored daily to ensure that the
infection did not return, but it continued to spread.
After two additional rounds of surgery, the infection finally seemed to be contained. A few days later, Mark was
removed from the ventilator and was able to breathe on his own. However, he had lost a great deal of skin and
soft tissue on his lower leg.
• Why does the removal of infected tissue stem the infection?
• What are some likely complications of this method of treatment?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
11.7 Gene Regulation: Operon Theory
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Compare inducible operons and repressible operons
• Describe why regulation of operons is important
Each nucleated cell in a multicellular organism contains copies of the same DNA. Similarly, all cells in two pure
bacterial cultures inoculated from the same starting colony contain the same DNA, with the exception of changes
that arise from spontaneous mutations. If each cell in a multicellular organism has the same DNA, then how is it that
cells in different parts of the organism’s body exhibit different characteristics? Similarly, how is it that the same
bacterial cells within two pure cultures exposed to different environmental conditions can exhibit different
phenotypes? In both cases, each genetically identical cell does not turn on, or express, the same set of genes. Only
a subset of proteins in a cell at a given time is expressed.
Genomic DNA contains both structural genes, which encode products that serve as cellular structures or enzymes,
and regulatory genes, which encode products that regulate gene expression. The expression of a gene is a highly
regulated process. Whereas regulating gene expression in multicellular organisms allows for cellular differentiation,
in single-celled organisms like prokaryotes, it primarily ensures that a cell’s resources are not wasted making
proteins that the cell does not need at that time.
Elucidating the mechanisms controlling gene expression is important to the understanding of human health.
=== PDF PAGE 450 ===
436 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
Malfunctions in this process in humans lead to the development of cancer and other diseases. Understanding the
interaction between the gene expression of a pathogen and that of its human host is important for the
understanding of a particular infectious disease. Gene regulation involves a complex web of interactions within a
given cell among signals from the cell’s environment, signaling molecules within the cell, and the cell’s DNA. These
interactions lead to the expression of some genes and the suppression of others, depending on circumstances.
Prokaryotes and eukaryotes share some similarities in their mechanisms to regulate gene expression; however,
gene expression in eukaryotes is more complicated because of the temporal and spatial separation between the
processes of transcription and translation. Thus, although most regulation of gene expression occurs through
transcriptional control in prokaryotes, regulation of gene expression in eukaryotes occurs at the transcriptional level
and post-transcriptionally (after the primary transcript has been made).
Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
In bacteria and archaea, structural proteins with related functions are usually encoded together within the genome
in a block called an operon and are transcribed together under the control of a single promoter, resulting in the
formation of a polycistronic transcript (Figure 11.32). In this way, regulation of the transcription of all of the
structural genes encoding the enzymes that catalyze the many steps in a single biochemical pathway can be
controlled simultaneously, because they will either all be needed at the same time, or none will be needed. For
example, in E. coli, all of the structural genes that encode enzymes needed to use lactose as an energy source lie
next to each other in the lactose (or lac) operon under the control of a single promoter, the lac promoter. French
scientists François Jacob (1920–2013) and Jacques Monod at the Pasteur Institute were the first to show the
organization of bacterial genes into operons, through their studies on the lac operon of E. coli. For this work, they
won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1965. Although eukaryotic genes are not organized into operons,
prokaryotic operons are excellent models for learning about gene regulation generally. There are some gene clusters
in eukaryotes that function similar to operons. Many of the principles can be applied to eukaryotic systems and
contribute to our understanding of changes in gene expression in eukaryotes that can result pathological changes
such as cancer.
Each operon includes DNA sequences that influence its own transcription; these are located in a region called the
regulatory region. The regulatory region includes the promoter and the region surrounding the promoter, to which
transcription factors, proteins encoded by regulatory genes, can bind. Transcription factors influence the binding of
RNA polymerase to the promoter and allow its progression to transcribe structural genes. A repressor is a
transcription factor that suppresses transcription of a gene in response to an external stimulus by binding to a DNA
sequence within the regulatory region called the operator, which is located between the RNA polymerase binding
site of the promoter and the transcriptional start site of the first structural gene. Repressor binding physically blocks
RNA polymerase from transcribing structural genes. Conversely, an activator is a transcription factor that increases
the transcription of a gene in response to an external stimulus by facilitating RNA polymerase binding to the
promoter. An inducer, a third type of regulatory molecule, is a small molecule that either activates or represses
transcription by interacting with a repressor or an activator.
In prokaryotes, there are examples of operons whose gene products are required rather consistently and whose
expression, therefore, is unregulated. Such operons are constitutively expressed, meaning they are transcribed
and translated continuously to provide the cell with constant intermediate levels of the protein products. Such
genes encode enzymes involved in housekeeping functions required for cellular maintenance, including DNA
replication, repair, and expression, as well as enzymes involved in core metabolism. In contrast, there are other
prokaryotic operons that are expressed only when needed and are regulated by repressors, activators, and inducers.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 451 ===
11.7 • Gene Regulation: Operon Theory 437
FIGURE 11.32 In prokaryotes, structural genes of related function are often organized together on the genome and transcribed together
under the control of a single promoter. The operon’s regulatory region includes both the promoter and the operator. If a repressor binds to
the operator, then the structural genes will not be transcribed. Alternatively, activators may bind to the regulatory region, enhancing
transcription.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What are the parts in the DNA sequence of an operon?
• What types of regulatory molecules are there?
Regulation by Repression
Prokaryotic operons are commonly controlled by the binding of repressors to operator regions, thereby preventing
the transcription of the structural genes. Such operons are classified as either repressible operons or inducible
operons. Repressible operons, like the tryptophan (trp) operon, typically contain genes encoding enzymes required
for a biosynthetic pathway. As long as the product of the pathway, like tryptophan, continues to be required by the
cell, a repressible operon will continue to be expressed. However, when the product of the biosynthetic pathway
begins to accumulate in the cell, removing the need for the cell to continue to make more, the expression of the
operon is repressed. Conversely, inducible operons, like the lac operon of E. coli, often contain genes encoding
enzymes in a pathway involved in the metabolism of a specific substrate like lactose. These enzymes are only
required when that substrate is available, thus expression of the operons is typically induced only in the presence of
the substrate.
The trp Operon: A Repressible Operon
E. coli can synthesize tryptophan using enzymes that are encoded by five structural genes located next to each other
in the trp operon (Figure 11.33). When environmental tryptophan is low, the operon is turned on. This means that
transcription is initiated, the genes are expressed, and tryptophan is synthesized. However, if tryptophan is present
in the environment, the trp operon is turned off. Transcription does not occur and tryptophan is not synthesized.
When tryptophan is not present in the cell, the repressor by itself does not bind to the operator; therefore, the
operon is active and tryptophan is synthesized. However, when tryptophan accumulates in the cell, two tryptophan
molecules bind to the trp repressor molecule, which changes its shape, allowing it to bind to the trp operator. This
binding of the active form of the trp repressor to the operator blocks RNA polymerase from transcribing the
structural genes, stopping expression of the operon. Thus, the actual product of the biosynthetic pathway controlled
by the operon regulates the expression of the operon.
=== PDF PAGE 452 ===
438 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
FIGURE 11.33 The five structural genes needed to synthesize tryptophan in E. coli are located next to each other in the trp operon. When
tryptophan is absent, the repressor protein does not bind to the operator, and the genes are transcribed. When tryptophan is plentiful,
tryptophan binds the repressor protein at the operator sequence. This physically blocks the RNA polymerase from transcribing the
tryptophan biosynthesis genes.
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch this video (https://openstax.org/l/22trpoperon) to learn more about the trp operon.
The lac Operon: An Inducible Operon
The lac operon is an example of an inducible operon that is also subject to activation in the absence of glucose
(Figure 11.34). The lac operon encodes three structural genes necessary to acquire and process the disaccharide
lactose from the environment, breaking it down into the simple sugars glucose and galactose. For the lac operon to
be expressed, lactose must be present. This makes sense for the cell because it would be energetically wasteful to
create the enzymes to process lactose if lactose was not available.
In the absence of lactose, the lac repressor is bound to the operator region of the lac operon, physically preventing
RNA polymerase from transcribing the structural genes. However, when lactose is present, the lactose inside the
cell is converted to allolactose. Allolactose serves as an inducer molecule, binding to the repressor and changing its
shape so that it is no longer able to bind to the operator DNA. Removal of the repressor in the presence of lactose
allows RNA polymerase to move through the operator region and begin transcription of the lac structural genes.
FIGURE 11.34 The three structural genes that are needed to degrade lactose in E. coli are located next to each other in the lac operon.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 453 ===
11.7 • Gene Regulation: Operon Theory 439
When lactose is absent, the repressor protein binds to the operator, physically blocking the RNA polymerase from transcribing the lac
structural genes. When lactose is available, a lactose molecule binds the repressor protein, preventing the repressor from binding to the
operator sequence, and the genes are transcribed.
The lac Operon: Activation by Catabolite Activator Protein
Bacteria typically have the ability to use a variety of substrates as carbon sources. However, because glucose is
usually preferable to other substrates, bacteria have mechanisms to ensure that alternative substrates are only
used when glucose has been depleted. Additionally, bacteria have mechanisms to ensure that the genes encoding
enzymes for using alternative substrates are expressed only when the alternative substrate is available. In the
1940s, Jacques Monod was the first to demonstrate the preference for certain substrates over others through his
studies of E. coli’s growth when cultured in the presence of two different substrates simultaneously. Such studies
generated diauxic growth curves, like the one shown in Figure 11.35. Although the preferred substrate glucose is
used first, E. coli grows quickly and the enzymes for lactose metabolism are absent. However, once glucose levels
are depleted, growth rates slow, inducing the expression of the enzymes needed for the metabolism of the second
substrate, lactose. Notice how the growth rate in lactose is slower, as indicated by the lower steepness of the growth
curve.
The ability to switch from glucose use to another substrate like lactose is a consequence of the activity of an enzyme
called Enzyme IIA (EIIA). When glucose levels drop, cells produce less ATP from catabolism (see Catabolism of
Carbohydrates), and EIIA becomes phosphorylated. Phosphorylated EIIA activates adenylyl cyclase, an enzyme
that converts some of the remaining ATP to cyclic AMP (cAMP), a cyclic derivative of AMP and important signaling
molecule involved in glucose and energy metabolism in E. coli. As a result, cAMP levels begin to rise in the cell
(Figure 11.36).
The lac operon also plays a role in this switch from using glucose to using lactose. When glucose is scarce, the
accumulating cAMP caused by increased adenylyl cyclase activity binds to catabolite activator protein (CAP), also
known as cAMP receptor protein (CRP). The complex binds to the promoter region of the lac operon (Figure 11.37).
In the regulatory regions of these operons, a CAP binding site is located upstream of the RNA polymerase binding
site in the promoter. Binding of the CAP-cAMP complex to this site increases the binding ability of RNA polymerase
to the promoter region to initiate the transcription of the structural genes. Thus, in the case of the lac operon, for
transcription to occur, lactose must be present (removing the lac repressor protein) and glucose levels must be
depleted (allowing binding of an activating protein). When glucose levels are high, there is catabolite repression of
operons encoding enzymes for the metabolism of alternative substrates. Because of low cAMP levels under these
conditions, there is an insufficient amount of the CAP-cAMP complex to activate transcription of these operons. See
Table 11.6 for a summary of the regulation of the lac operon.
FIGURE 11.35 When grown in the presence of two substrates, E. coli uses the preferred substrate (in this case glucose) until it is depleted.
=== PDF PAGE 454 ===
440 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
Then, enzymes needed for the metabolism of the second substrate are expressed and growth resumes, although at a slower rate.
FIGURE 11.36 When ATP levels decrease due to depletion of glucose, some remaining ATP is converted to cAMP by adenylyl cyclase. Thus,
increased cAMP levels signal glucose depletion.
FIGURE 11.37 (a) In the presence of cAMP, CAP binds to the promoters of operons, like the lac operon, that encode genes for enzymes for
the use of alternate substrates. (b) For the lac operon to be expressed, there must be activation by cAMP-CAP as well as removal of the lac
repressor from the operator.
Conditions Affecting Transcription of the lac Operon
Glucose CAP binds Lactose Repressor binds Transcription
+ – – + No
+ – + – Some
– + – + No
– + + – Yes
TABLE 11.6
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 455 ===
11.7 • Gene Regulation: Operon Theory 441
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch an animated tutorial (https://openstax.org/l/22lacoperon) about the workings of lac operon here.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What affects the binding of the trp operon repressor to the operator?
• How and when is the behavior of the lac repressor protein altered?
• In addition to being repressible, how else is the lac operon regulated?
Global Responses of Prokaryotes
In prokaryotes, there are also several higher levels of gene regulation that have the ability to control the
transcription of many related operons simultaneously in response to an environmental signal. A group of operons all
controlled simultaneously is called a regulon.
Alarmones
When sensing impending stress, prokaryotes alter the expression of a wide variety of operons to respond in
coordination. They do this through the production of alarmones, which are small intracellular nucleotide derivatives.
Alarmones change which genes are expressed and stimulate the expression of specific stress-response genes. The
use of alarmones to alter gene expression in response to stress appears to be important in pathogenic bacteria. On
encountering host defense mechanisms and other harsh conditions during infection, many operons encoding
virulence genes are upregulated in response to alarmone signaling. Knowledge of these responses is key to being
able to fully understand the infection process of many pathogens and to the development of therapies to counter
this process.
Alternate σ Factors
Since the σ subunit of bacterial RNA polymerase confers specificity as to which promoters should be transcribed,
altering the σ factor used is another way for bacteria to quickly and globally change what regulons are transcribed
at a given time. The σ factor recognizes sequences within a bacterial promoter, so different σ factors will each
recognize slightly different promoter sequences. In this way, when the cell senses specific environmental
conditions, it may respond by changing which σ factor it expresses, degrading the old one and producing a new one
to transcribe the operons encoding genes whose products will be useful under the new environmental condition. For
example, in sporulating bacteria of the genera Bacillus and Clostridium (which include many pathogens), a group of
σ factors controls the expression of the many genes needed for sporulation in response to sporulation-stimulating
signals.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What is the name given to a collection of operons that can be regulated as a group?
• What type of stimulus would trigger the transcription of a different σ factor?
Additional Methods of Regulation in Bacteria: Attenuation and Riboswitches
Although most gene expression is regulated at the level of transcription initiation in prokaryotes, there are also
mechanisms to control both the completion of transcription as well as translation concurrently. Since their
discovery, these mechanisms have been shown to control the completion of transcription and translation of many
prokaryotic operons. Because these mechanisms link the regulation of transcription and translation directly, they
are specific to prokaryotes, because these processes are physically separated in eukaryotes.
One such regulatory system is attenuation, whereby secondary stem-loop structures formed within the 5’ end of an
mRNA being transcribed determine if transcription to complete the synthesis of this mRNA will occur and if this
mRNA will be used for translation. Beyond the transcriptional repression mechanism already discussed, attenuation
also controls expression of the trp operon in E. coli (Figure 11.38). The trp operon regulatory region contains a
=== PDF PAGE 456 ===
442 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
leader sequence called trpL between the operator and the first structural gene, which has four stretches of RNA that
can base pair with each other in different combinations. When a terminator stem-loop forms, transcription
terminates, releasing RNA polymerase from the mRNA. However, when an antiterminator stem-loop forms, this
prevents the formation of the terminator stem-loop, so RNA polymerase can transcribe the structural genes.
A related mechanism of concurrent regulation of transcription and translation in prokaryotes is the use of a
riboswitch, a small region of noncoding RNA found within the 5’ end of some prokaryotic mRNA molecules (Figure
11.39. A riboswitch may bind to a small intracellular molecule to stabilize certain secondary structures of the mRNA
molecule. The binding of the small molecule determines which stem-loop structure forms, thus influencing the
completion of mRNA synthesis and protein synthesis.
FIGURE 11.38 When tryptophan is plentiful, translation of the short leader peptide encoded by trpL proceeds, the terminator loop between
regions 3 and 4 forms, and transcription terminates. When tryptophan levels are depleted, translation of the short leader peptide stalls at
region 1, allowing regions 2 and 3 to form an antiterminator loop, and RNA polymerase can transcribe the structural genes of the trp
operon.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 457 ===
11.7 • Gene Regulation: Operon Theory 443
FIGURE 11.39 Riboswitches found within prokaryotic mRNA molecules can bind to small intracellular molecules, stabilizing certain RNA
structures, influencing either the completion of the synthesis of the mRNA molecule itself (left) or the protein made using that mRNA
(right).
Other Factors Affecting Gene Expression in Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes
Although the focus on our discussion of transcriptional control used prokaryotic operons as examples, eukaryotic
transcriptional control is similar in many ways. As in prokaryotes, eukaryotic transcription can be controlled through
the binding of transcription factors including repressors and activators. Interestingly, eukaryotic transcription can be
influenced by the binding of proteins to regions of DNA, called enhancers, rather far away from the gene, through
DNA looping facilitated between the enhancer and the promoter (Figure 11.40). Overall, regulating transcription is a
highly effective way to control gene expression in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. However, the control of gene
expression in eukaryotes in response to environmental and cellular stresses can be accomplished in additional ways
without the binding of transcription factors to regulatory regions.
FIGURE 11.40 In eukaryotes, an enhancer is a DNA sequence that promotes transcription. Each enhancer is made up of short DNA
sequences called distal control elements. Activators bound to the distal control elements interact with mediator proteins and transcription
factors. Two different genes may have the same promoter but different distal control elements, enabling differential gene expression.
DNA-Level Control
In eukaryotes, the DNA molecules or associated histones can be chemically modified in such a way as to influence
transcription; this is called epigenetic regulation. Methylation of certain cytosine nucleotides in DNA in response to
=== PDF PAGE 458 ===
444 11 • Mechanisms of Microbial Genetics
environmental factors has been shown to influence use of such DNA for transcription, with DNA methylation
commonly correlating to lowered levels of gene expression. Additionally, in response to environmental factors,
histone proteins for packaging DNA can also be chemically modified in multiple ways, including acetylation and
deacetylation, influencing the packaging state of DNA and thus affecting the availability of loosely wound DNA for
transcription. These chemical modifications can sometimes be maintained through multiple rounds of cell division,
making at least some of these epigenetic changes heritable.
LINK TO LEARNING
This video (https://openstax.org/l/22epigreg) describes how epigenetic regulation controls gene expression.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What stops or allows transcription to proceed when attenuation is operating?
• What determines the state of a riboswitch?
• Describe the function of an enhancer.
• Describe two mechanisms of epigenetic regulation in eukaryotes.
CLINICAL FOCUS
Resolution
Although Mark survived his bout with necrotizing fasciitis, he would now have to undergo a skin-grafting surgery,
followed by long-term physical therapy. Based on the amount of muscle mass he lost, it is unlikely that his leg
will return to full strength, but his physical therapist is optimistic that he will regain some use of his leg.
Laboratory testing revealed the causative agent of Mark’s infection was a strain of Staphylococcus aureus. As
required by law, Mark’s case was reported to the state health department and ultimately to the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). At the CDC, the strain of Staphylococcus aureus strep isolated from Mark
was analyzed more thoroughly for methicillin resistance.
Methicillin resistance is genetically coded and is increasing among strains of S. aureus through horizontal gene
transfer. Strains of S. aureus that are resistant to methicillin are typically resistant to virtually all beta-lactam
antibiotics and other classes of antibiotics as well. In necrotizing fasciitis, blood flow to the infected area is
typically limited because of the action of various genetically encoded bacterial toxins. This is why there is
typically little to no bleeding as a result of the incision test. Unfortunately, these bacterial toxins limit the
effectiveness of intravenous antibiotics in clearing infection from the skin and underlying tissue, meaning that
antibiotic resistance alone does not explain the ineffectiveness of Mark’s treatment. Nevertheless, intravenous
antibiotic therapy was warranted to help minimize the possible outcome of sepsis, which is a common outcome
of necrotizing fasciitis. Through genomic analysis by the CDC of the strain isolated from Mark, several of the
important virulence genes were shown to be encoded within pathogenicity islands that were associated with
prophages. Horizontal transfer of pathogenicity island-encoded virulence factors between strains of S. aureus
has been shown to occur through induction of prophage and can be induced by treatment with antibiotics.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 459 ===
11 • Summary 445
Summary
11.1 The Functions of Genetic Material cell types.
• Rolling circle replication is a type of rapid
• DNA serves two important cellular functions: It is
unidirectional DNA synthesis of a circular DNA
the genetic material passed from parent to
molecule used for the replication of some
offspring and it serves as the information to
plasmids.
direct and regulate the construction of the
proteins necessary for the cell to perform all of 11.3 RNA Transcription
its functions.
• During transcription, the information encoded in
• The central dogma states that DNA organized
DNA is used to make RNA.
into genes specifies the sequences of messenger
• RNA polymerase synthesizes RNA, using the
RNA (mRNA), which, in turn, specifies the amino
antisense strand of the DNA as template by
acid sequence of proteins.
adding complementary RNA nucleotides to the 3’
• The genotype of a cell is the full collection of
end of the growing strand.
genes a cell contains. Not all genes are used to
• RNA polymerase binds to DNA at a sequence
make proteins simultaneously. The phenotype is
called a promoter during the initiation of
a cell’s observable characteristics resulting from
transcription.
the proteins it is producing at a given time under
• Genes encoding proteins of related functions are
specific environmental conditions.
frequently transcribed under the control of a
11.2 DNA Replication single promoter in prokaryotes, resulting in the
formation of a polycistronic mRNA molecule
• The DNA replication process is
that encodes multiple polypeptides.
semiconservative, which results in two DNA
• Unlike DNA polymerase, RNA polymerase does
molecules, each having one parental strand of
not require a 3’-OH group to add nucleotides, so
DNA and one newly synthesized strand.
a primer is not needed during initiation.
• In bacteria, the initiation of replication occurs at
• Termination of transcription in bacteria occurs
the origin of replication, where supercoiled
when the RNA polymerase encounters specific
DNA is unwound by DNA gyrase, made single-
DNA sequences that lead to stalling of the
stranded by helicase, and bound by single-
polymerase. This results in release of RNA
stranded binding protein to maintain its single-
polymerase from the DNA template strand,
stranded state. Primase synthesizes a short RNA
freeing the RNA transcript.
primer, providing a free 3’-OH group to which
• Eukaryotes have three different RNA
DNA polymerase III can add DNA nucleotides.
polymerases. Eukaryotes also have
• During elongation, the leading strand of DNA is
monocistronic mRNA, each encoding only a
synthesized continuously from a single primer.
single polypeptide.
The lagging strand is synthesized
• Eukaryotic primary transcripts are processed in
discontinuously in short Okazaki fragments,
several ways, including the addition of a 5’ cap
each requiring its own primer. The RNA primers
and a 3′-poly-A tail, as well as splicing, to
are removed and replaced with DNA nucleotides
generate a mature mRNA molecule that can be
by bacterial DNA polymerase I, and DNA ligase
transported out of the nucleus and that is
seals the gaps between these fragments.
protected from degradation.
• Termination of replication in bacteria involves
the resolution of circular DNA concatemers by 11.4 Protein Synthesis (Translation)
topoisomerase IV to release the two copies of
• In translation, polypeptides are synthesized
the circular chromosome.
using mRNA sequences and cellular machinery,
• Eukaryotes typically have multiple linear
including tRNAs that match mRNA codons to
chromosomes, each with multiple origins of
specific amino acids and ribosomes composed of
replication. Overall, replication in eukaryotes is
RNA and proteins that catalyze the reaction.
similar to that in prokaryotes.
• The genetic code is degenerate in that several
• The linear nature of eukaryotic chromosomes
mRNA codons code for the same amino acids.
necessitates telomeres to protect genes near the
The genetic code is almost universal among living
end of the chromosomes. Telomerase extends
organisms.
telomeres, preventing their degradation, in some
• Prokaryotic (70S) and cytoplasmic eukaryotic
=== PDF PAGE 460 ===
446 11 • Summary
(80S) ribosomes are each composed of a large 11.5 Mutations
subunit and a small subunit of differing sizes
• A mutation is a heritable change in DNA. A
between the two groups. Each subunit is
mutation may lead to a change in the amino-acid
composed of rRNA and protein. Organelle
sequence of a protein, possibly affecting its
ribosomes in eukaryotic cells resemble
function.
prokaryotic ribosomes.
• A point mutation affects a single base pair. A
• Some 60 to 90 species of tRNA exist in bacteria.
point mutation may cause a silent mutation if
Each tRNA has a three-nucleotide anticodon as
the mRNA codon codes for the same amino acid,
well as a binding site for a cognate amino acid.
a missense mutation if the mRNA codon codes
All tRNAs with a specific anticodon will carry the
for a different amino acid, or a nonsense
same amino acid.
mutation if the mRNA codon becomes a stop
• Initiation of translation occurs when the small
codon.
ribosomal subunit binds with initiation factors
• Missense mutations may retain function,
and an initiator tRNA at the start codon of an
depending on the chemistry of the new amino
mRNA, followed by the binding to the initiation
acid and its location in the protein. Nonsense
complex of the large ribosomal subunit.
mutations produce truncated and frequently
• In prokaryotic cells, the start codon codes for N-
nonfunctional proteins.
formyl-methionine carried by a special initiator
• A frameshift mutation results from an insertion
tRNA. In eukaryotic cells, the start codon codes
or deletion of a number of nucleotides that is not
for methionine carried by a special initiator tRNA.
a multiple of three. The change in reading frame
In addition, whereas ribosomal binding of the
alters every amino acid after the point of the
mRNA in prokaryotes is facilitated by the Shine-
mutation and results in a nonfunctional protein.
Dalgarno sequence within the mRNA, eukaryotic
• Spontaneous mutations occur through DNA
ribosomes bind to the 5’ cap of the mRNA.
replication errors, whereas induced mutations
• During the elongation stage of translation, a
occur through exposure to a mutagen.
charged tRNA binds to mRNA in the A site of the
• Mutagenic agents are frequently carcinogenic but
ribosome; a peptide bond is catalyzed between
not always. However, nearly all carcinogens are
the two adjacent amino acids, breaking the bond
mutagenic.
between the first amino acid and its tRNA; the
• Chemical mutagens include base analogs and
ribosome moves one codon along the mRNA; and
chemicals that modify existing bases. In both
the first tRNA is moved from the P site of the
cases, mutations are introduced after several
ribosome to the E site and leaves the ribosomal
rounds of DNA replication.
complex.
• Ionizing radiation, such as X-rays and γ-rays,
• Termination of translation occurs when the
leads to breakage of the phosphodiester
ribosome encounters a stop codon, which does
backbone of DNA and can also chemically modify
not code for a tRNA. Release factors cause the
bases to alter their base-pairing rules.
polypeptide to be released, and the ribosomal
• Nonionizing radiation like ultraviolet light may
complex dissociates.
introduce pyrimidine (thymine) dimers, which,
• In prokaryotes, transcription and translation may
during DNA replication and transcription, may
be coupled, with translation of an mRNA
introduce frameshift or point mutations.
molecule beginning as soon as transcription
• Cells have mechanisms to repair naturally
allows enough mRNA exposure for the binding of
occurring mutations. DNA polymerase has
a ribosome, prior to transcription termination.
proofreading activity. Mismatch repair is a
Transcription and translation are not coupled in
process to repair incorrectly incorporated bases
eukaryotes because transcription occurs in the
after DNA replication has been completed.
nucleus, whereas translation occurs in the
• Pyrimidine dimers can also be repaired. In
cytoplasm or in association with the rough
nucleotide excision repair (dark repair),
endoplasmic reticulum.
enzymes recognize the distortion introduced by
• Polypeptides often require one or more post-
the pyrimidine dimer and replace the damaged
translational modifications to become
strand with the correct bases, using the
biologically active.
undamaged DNA strand as a template. Bacteria
and other organisms may also use direct repair,
in which the photolyase enzyme, in the presence
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 461 ===
11 • Summary 447
of visible light, breaks apart the pyrimidines. genes.
• Through comparison of growth on the complete
11.7 Gene Regulation: Operon Theory
plate and lack of growth on media lacking
specific nutrients, specific loss-of-function • Gene expression is a tightly regulated process.
mutants called auxotrophs can be identified. • Gene expression in prokaryotes is largely
• The Ames test is an inexpensive method that regulated at the point of transcription. Gene
uses auxotrophic bacteria to measure expression in eukaryotes is additionally regulated
mutagenicity of a chemical compound. post-transcriptionally.
Mutagenicity is an indicator of carcinogenic • Prokaryotic structural genes of related function
potential. are often organized into operons, all controlled
by transcription from a single promoter. The
11.6 How Asexual Prokaryotes Achieve
regulatory region of an operon includes the
Genetic Diversity
promoter itself and the region surrounding the
• Horizontal gene transfer is an important way for promoter to which transcription factors can bind
asexually reproducing organisms like prokaryotes to influence transcription.
to acquire new traits. • Although some operons are constitutively
• There are three mechanisms of horizontal gene expressed, most are subject to regulation
transfer typically used by bacteria: through the use of transcription factors
transformation, transduction, and conjugation. (repressors and activators). A repressor binds to
• Transformation allows for competent cells to an operator, a DNA sequence within the
take up naked DNA, released from other cells on regulatory region between the RNA polymerase
their death, into their cytoplasm, where it may binding site in the promoter and first structural
recombine with the host genome. gene, thereby physically blocking transcription of
• In generalized transduction, any piece of these operons. An activator binds within the
chromosomal DNA may be transferred by regulatory region of an operon, helping RNA
accidental packaging of the degraded host polymerase bind to the promoter, thereby
chromosome into a phage head. In specialized enhancing the transcription of this operon. An
transduction, only chromosomal DNA adjacent inducer influences transcription through
to the integration site of a lysogenic phage may interacting with a repressor or activator.
be transferred as a result of imprecise excision of • The trp operon is a classic example of a
the prophage. repressible operon. When tryptophan
• Conjugation is mediated by the F plasmid, which accumulates, tryptophan binds to a repressor,
encodes a conjugation pilus that brings an F which then binds to the operator, preventing
plasmid-containing F+ cell into contact with an F- further transcription.
cell. • The lac operon is a classic example an inducible
• The rare integration of the F plasmid into the operon. When lactose is present in the cell, it is
bacterial chromosome, generating an Hfr cell, converted to allolactose. Allolactose acts as an
allows for transfer of chromosomal DNA from the inducer, binding to the repressor and preventing
donor to the recipient. Additionally, imprecise the repressor from binding to the operator. This
excision of the F plasmid from the chromosome allows transcription of the structural genes.
may generate an F’ plasmid that may be • The lac operon is also subject to activation. When
transferred to a recipient by conjugation. glucose levels are depleted, some cellular ATP is
• Conjugation transfer of R plasmids is an converted into cAMP, which binds to the
important mechanism for the spread of antibiotic catabolite activator protein (CAP). The cAMP-
resistance in bacterial communities. CAP complex activates transcription of the lac
• Transposons are molecules of DNA with inverted operon. When glucose levels are high, its
repeats at their ends that also encode the presence prevents transcription of the lac operon
enzyme transposase, allowing for their and other operons by catabolite repression.
movement from one location in DNA to another. • Small intracellular molecules called alarmones
Although found in both prokaryotes and are made in response to various environmental
eukaryotes, transposons are clinically relevant in stresses, allowing bacteria to control the
bacterial pathogens for the movement of transcription of a group of operons, called a
virulence factors, including antibiotic resistance regulon.
=== PDF PAGE 462 ===
448 11 • Review Questions
• Bacteria have the ability to change which σ that transcript. These mechanisms work through
factor of RNA polymerase they use in response the formation of stem loops in the 5’ end of an
to environmental conditions to quickly and mRNA molecule currently being synthesized.
globally change which regulons are transcribed. • There are additional points of regulation of gene
• Prokaryotes have regulatory mechanisms, expression in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In
including attenuation and the use of eukaryotes, epigenetic regulation by chemical
riboswitches, to simultaneously control the modification of DNA or histones, and regulation
completion of transcription and translation from of RNA processing are two methods.
Review Questions
Multiple Choice
1 . DNA does all but which of the following? A. 3′-AGGCTTGAC-4′
A. serves as the genetic material passed from B. 3′-TCCGAACTG-5′
parent to offspring C. 3′-GTCAAGCCT-5′
B. remains constant despite changes in D. 3′-CAGTTCGGA-5′
environmental conditions
C. provides the instructions for the synthesis 7 . During which stage of bacterial transcription is
of messenger RNA the σ subunit of the RNA polymerase involved?
D. is read by ribosomes during the process of A. initiation
translation B. elongation
C. termination
2 . According to the central dogma, which of the D. splicing
following represents the flow of genetic
information in cells? 8 . Which of the following components is involved in
A. protein to DNA to RNA the initiation of transcription?
B. DNA to RNA to protein A. primer
C. RNA to DNA to protein B. origin
D. DNA to protein to RNA C. promoter
D. start codon
3 . Which of the following is the enzyme that
replaces the RNA nucleotides in a primer with 9 . Which of the following is not a function of the 5’
DNA nucleotides? cap or 3’ poly-A tail of a mature eukaryotic
A. DNA polymerase III mRNA molecule?
B. DNA polymerase I A. to facilitate splicing
C. primase B. to prevent mRNA degradation
D. helicase C. to aid export of the mature transcript to
the cytoplasm
4 . Which of the following is not involved in the D. to aid ribosome binding to the transcript
initiation of replication?
A. ligase 10 . Mature mRNA from a eukaryote would contain
B. DNA gyrase each of these features except which of the
C. single-stranded binding protein following?
D. primase A. exon-encoded RNA
B. intron-encoded RNA
5 . Which of the following enzymes involved in DNA C. 5’ cap
replication is unique to eukaryotes? D. 3’ poly-A tail
A. helicase
B. DNA polymerase 11 . Which of the following is the name of the three-
C. ligase base sequence in the mRNA that binds to a tRNA
D. telomerase molecule?
A. P site
6 . Which of the following would be synthesized B. codon
using 5′-CAGTTCGGA-3′ as a template?
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 463 ===
11 • Review Questions 449
C. anticodon C. silent mutation
D. CCA binding site D. deletion of one nucleotide
12 . Which component is the last to join the initiation 19 . Which of the following is the type of DNA repair
complex during the initiation of translation? in which thymine dimers are directly broken
A. the mRNA molecule down by the enzyme photolyase?
B. the small ribosomal subunit A. direct repair
C. the large ribosomal subunit B. nucleotide excision repair
D. the initiator tRNA C. mismatch repair
D. proofreading
13 . During elongation in translation, to which
ribosomal site does an incoming charged tRNA 20 . Which of the following regarding the Ames test is
molecule bind? true?
A. A site A. It is used to identify newly formed
B. P site auxotrophic mutants.
C. E site B. It is used to identify mutants with restored
D. B site biosynthetic activity.
C. It is used to identify spontaneous mutants.
14 . Which of the following is the amino acid that D. It is used to identify mutants lacking
appears at the N-terminus of all newly photoreactivation activity.
translated prokaryotic and eukaryotic
polypeptides? 21 . Which is the mechanism by which improper
A. tryptophan excision of a prophage from a bacterial
B. methionine chromosome results in packaging of bacterial
C. selenocysteine genes near the integration site into a phage
D. glycine head?
A. conjugation
15 . When the ribosome reaches a nonsense codon, B. generalized transduction
which of the following occurs? C. specialized transduction
A. a methionine is incorporated D. transformation
B. the polypeptide is released
C. a peptide bond forms 22 . Which of the following refers to the uptake of
D. the A site binds to a charged tRNA naked DNA from the surrounding environment?
A. conjugation
16 . Which of the following is a change in the B. generalized transduction
sequence that leads to formation of a stop C. specialized transduction
codon? D. transformation
A. missense mutation
B. nonsense mutation 23 . The F plasmid is involved in which of the
C. silent mutation following processes?
D. deletion mutation A. conjugation
B. transduction
17 . The formation of pyrimidine dimers results from C. transposition
which of the following? D. transformation
A. spontaneous errors by DNA polymerase
B. exposure to gamma radiation 24 . Which of the following refers to the mechanism
C. exposure to ultraviolet radiation of horizontal gene transfer naturally responsible
D. exposure to intercalating agents for the spread of antibiotic resistance genes
within a bacterial population?
18 . Which of the following is an example of a A. conjugation
frameshift mutation? B. generalized transduction
A. a deletion of a codon C. specialized transduction
B. missense mutation D. transformation
=== PDF PAGE 464 ===
450 11 • Review Questions
25 . An operon of genes encoding enzymes in a D. activated
biosynthetic pathway is likely to be which of the
following? 27 . Which of the following conditions leads to
A. inducible maximal expression of the lac operon?
B. repressible A. lactose present, glucose absent
C. constitutive B. lactose present, glucose present
D. monocistronic C. lactose absent, glucose absent
D. lactose absent, glucose present
26 . An operon encoding genes that are transcribed
and translated continuously to provide the cell 28 . Which of the following is a type of regulation of
with constant intermediate levels of the protein gene expression unique to eukaryotes?
products is said to be which of the following? A. attenuation
A. repressible B. use of alternate σ factor
B. inducible C. chemical modification of histones
C. constitutive D. alarmones
True/False
29 . Cells are always producing proteins from every different amino acid.
gene they possess.
32 . Carcinogens are typically mutagenic.
30 . More primers are used in lagging strand
33 . Asexually reproducing organisms lack
synthesis than in leading strand synthesis.
mechanisms for generating genetic diversity
31 . Each codon within the genetic code encodes a within a population.
Fill in the Blank
34 . The process of making an RNA copy of a gene is 42 . A chemical mutagen that is structurally similar
called ________. to a nucleotide but has different base-pairing
rules is called a ________.
35 . A cell’s ________ remains constant whereas its
phenotype changes in response to 43 . The enzyme used in light repair to split thymine
environmental influences. dimers is called ________.
36 . The enzyme responsible for relaxing supercoiled 44 . The phenotype of an organism that is most
DNA to allow for the initiation of replication is commonly observed in nature is called the
called ________. ________.
37 . Unidirectional replication of a circular DNA 45 . A small DNA molecule that has the ability to
molecule like a plasmid that involves nicking one independently excise from one location in a
DNA strand and displacing it while synthesizing larger DNA molecule and integrate into the DNA
a new strand is called ________. elsewhere is called a ________.
38 . A ________ mRNA is one that codes for multiple 46 . ________ is a group of mechanisms that allow
polypeptides. for the introduction of genetic material from one
organism to another organism within the same
39 . The protein complex responsible for removing
generation.
intron-encoded RNA sequences from primary
transcripts in eukaryotes is called the ________. 47 . The DNA sequence, to which repressors may
bind, that lies between the promoter and the
40 . The third position within a codon, in which
first structural gene is called the ________.
changes often result in the incorporation of the
same amino acid into the growing polypeptide, is 48 . The prevention of expression of operons
called the ________. encoding substrate use pathways for substrates
other than glucose when glucose is present is
41 . The enzyme that adds an amino acid to a tRNA
called _______.
molecule is called ________.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 465 ===
11 • Review Questions 451
Short Answer
49 . Can two observably different cells have the 56 . How does the process of translation differ
same genotype? Explain. between prokaryotes and eukaryotes?
50 . Why is primase required for DNA replication? 57 . What is meant by the genetic code being nearly
universal?
51 . What is the role of single-stranded binding
protein in DNA replication? 58 . Below is an antisense DNA sequence. Translate
the mRNA molecule synthesized using the
52 . Below is a DNA sequence. Envision that this is a
genetic code, recording the resulting amino acid
section of a DNA molecule that has separated in
sequence, indicating the N and C termini.
preparation for replication, so you are only
Antisense DNA strand: 3’-T A C T G A C T G A C G
seeing one DNA strand. Construct the
A T C-5’
complementary DNA sequence (indicating 5’
and 3’ ends). 59 . Why is it more likely that insertions or deletions
DNA sequence: 3’-T A C T G A C T G A C G A T will be more detrimental to a cell than point
C-5’ mutations?
53 . What is the purpose of RNA processing in 60 . Briefly describe two ways in which chromosomal
eukaryotes? Why don’t prokaryotes require DNA from a donor cell may be transferred to a
similar processing? recipient cell during the process of conjugation.
54 . Below is a DNA sequence. Envision that this is a 61 . Describe what happens when a nonsense
section of a DNA molecule that has separated in mutation is introduced into the gene encoding
preparation for transcription, so you are only transposase within a transposon.
seeing the antisense strand. Construct the
62 . What are two ways that bacteria can influence
mRNA sequence transcribed from this template.
the transcription of multiple different operons
Antisense DNA strand: 3’-T A C T G A C T G A C G
simultaneously in response to a particular
A T C-5’
environmental condition?
55 . Why does translation terminate when the
ribosome reaches a stop codon? What happens?
Critical Thinking
63 . A pure culture of an unknown bacterium was A sites; mRNA; codons; anticodons; growing
streaked onto plates of a variety of media. You polypeptide; incoming amino acid; direction of
notice that the colony morphology is strikingly translocation; small ribosomal unit; large ribosomal
different on plates of minimal media with unit.
glucose compared to that seen on trypticase soy
agar plates. How can you explain these
differences in colony morphology?
64 . Review Figure 11.4 and Figure 11.5. Why was it
important that Meselson and Stahl continue
their experiment to at least two rounds of
replication after isotopic labeling of the starting
DNA with 15N, instead of stopping the
experiment after only one round of replication?
65 . If deoxyribonucleotides that lack the 3’-OH
groups are added during the replication process,
what do you expect will occur?
68 . Prior to the elucidation of the genetic code,
66 . Predict the effect of an alteration in the prominent scientists, including Francis Crick,
sequence of nucleotides in the –35 region of a had predicted that each mRNA codon, coding for
bacterial promoter. one of the 20 amino acids, needed to be at least
three nucleotides long. Why is it not possible for
67 . Label the following in the figure: ribosomal E, P, and
=== PDF PAGE 466 ===
452 11 • Review Questions
codons to be any shorter? 70 . Why do you think the Ames test is preferable to
the use of animal models to screen chemical
69 . Below are several DNA sequences that are
compounds for mutagenicity?
mutated compared with the wild-type sequence:
3’-T A C T G A C T G A C G A T C-5’. Envision that 71 . The following figure is from Monod’s original
each is a section of a DNA molecule that has work on diauxic growth showing the growth of E.
separated in preparation for transcription, so coli in the simultaneous presence of xylose and
you are only seeing the template strand. glucose as the only carbon sources. Explain
Construct the complementary DNA sequences what is happening at points A–D with respect to
(indicating 5’ and 3’ ends) for each mutated DNA the carbon source being used for growth, and
sequence, then transcribe (indicating 5’ and 3’ explain whether the xylose-use operon is being
ends) the template strands, and translate the expressed (and why). Note that expression of
mRNA molecules using the genetic code, the enzymes required for xylose use is regulated
recording the resulting amino acid sequence in a manner similar to the expression of the
(indicating the N and C termini). What type of enzymes required for lactose use.
mutation is each?
Mutated DNA Template Strand #1: 3’-T A C
T G T C T G A C G A T C-5’
Complementary DNA sequence:
mRNA sequence transcribed from template:
Amino acid sequence of peptide:
Type of mutation:
Mutated DNA Template Strand #2: 3’-T A C
G G A C T G A C G A T C-5’
Complementary DNA sequence:
mRNA sequence transcribed from template:
Amino acid sequence of peptide:
Type of mutation:
Mutated DNA Template Strand #3: 3’-T A C
T G A C T G A C T A T C-5’
Complementary DNA sequence:
mRNA sequence transcribed from template:
Amino acid sequence of peptide:
Type of mutation:
Mutated DNA Template Strand #4: 3’-T A C
G A C T G A C T A T C-5’
Complementary DNA sequence:
mRNA sequence transcribed from template:
Amino acid sequence of peptide:
Type of mutation:
Access for free at openstax.org