=== PDF PAGE 673 ===
CHAPTER 17
Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
FIGURE 17.1 Varicella, or chickenpox, is caused by the highly contagious varicella-zoster virus. The characteristic rash seen here is partly
a result of inflammation associated with the body’s immune response to the virus. Inflammation is a response mechanism of innate
immunity that helps the body fight off a wide range of infections. (credit: John Noble / CDC; Public Domain)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
17.1 Physical Defenses
17.2 Chemical Defenses
17.3 Cellular Defenses
17.4 Pathogen Recognition and Phagocytosis
17.5 Inflammation and Fever
INTRODUCTION Despite relatively constant exposure to pathogenic microbes in the environment, humans do not
generally suffer from constant infection or disease. Under most circumstances, the body is able to defend itself from
the threat of infection thanks to a complex immune system designed to repel, kill, and expel disease-causing
invaders. Immunity as a whole can be described as two interrelated parts: nonspecific innate immunity, which is the
subject of this chapter, and specific adaptive host defenses, which are discussed in the next chapter.
The nonspecific innate immune response provides a first line of defense that can often prevent infections from
gaining a solid foothold in the body. These defenses are described as nonspecific because they do not target any
specific pathogen; rather, they defend against a wide range of potential pathogens. They are called innate because
they are built-in mechanisms of the human organism. Unlike the specific adaptive defenses, they are not acquired
over time and they have no “memory” (they do not improve after repeated exposures to specific pathogens).
=== PDF PAGE 674 ===
660 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
Broadly speaking, nonspecific innate defenses provide an immediate (or very rapid) response against potential
pathogens. However, these responses are neither perfect nor impenetrable. They can be circumvented by
pathogens on occasion, and sometimes they can even cause damage to the body, contributing to the signs and
symptoms of infection (Figure 17.1).
17.1 Physical Defenses
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the various physical barriers and mechanical defenses that protect the human body against
infection and disease
• Describe the role of microbiota as a first-line defense against infection and disease
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 1
Angela, a 25-year-old female patient in the emergency department, is having some trouble communicating
verbally because of shortness of breath. A nurse observes constriction and swelling of the airway and labored
breathing. The nurse asks Angela if she has a history of asthma or allergies. Angela shakes her head no, but
there is fear in her eyes. With some difficulty, she explains that her father died suddenly at age 27, when she
was just a little girl, of a similar respiratory attack. The underlying cause had never been identified.
• What are some possible causes of constriction and swelling of the airway?
• What causes swelling of body tissues in general?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.
Nonspecific innate immunity can be characterized as a multifaceted system of defenses that targets invading
pathogens in a nonspecific manner. In this chapter, we have divided the numerous defenses that make up this
system into three categories: physical defenses, chemical defenses, and cellular defenses. However, it is important
to keep in mind that these defenses do not function independently, and the categories often overlap. Table 17.1
provides an overview of the nonspecific defenses discussed in this chapter.
Overview of Nonspecific Innate Immune Defenses
Physical barriers
Physical defenses Mechanical defenses
Microbiome
Chemicals and enzymes in body fluids
Antimicrobial peptides
Chemical defenses Plasma protein mediators
Cytokines
Inflammation-eliciting mediators
TABLE 17.1
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 675 ===
17.1 • Physical Defenses 661
Overview of Nonspecific Innate Immune Defenses
Granulocytes
Cellular defenses
Agranulocytes
TABLE 17.1
Physical defenses provide the body’s most basic form of nonspecific defense. They include physical barriers to
microbes, such as the skin and mucous membranes, as well as mechanical defenses that physically remove
microbes and debris from areas of the body where they might cause harm or infection. In addition, the microbiome
provides a measure of physical protection against disease, as microbes of the normal microbiota compete with
pathogens for nutrients and cellular binding sites necessary to cause infection.
Physical Barriers
Physical barriers play an important role in preventing microbes from reaching tissues that are susceptible to
infection. At the cellular level, barriers consist of cells that are tightly joined to prevent invaders from crossing
through to deeper tissue. For example, the endothelial cells that line blood vessels have very tight cell-to-cell
junctions, blocking microbes from gaining access to the bloodstream. Cell junctions are generally composed of cell
membrane proteins that may connect with the extracellular matrix or with complementary proteins from
neighboring cells. Tissues in various parts of the body have different types of cell junctions. These include tight
junctions, desmosomes, and gap junctions, as illustrated in Figure 17.2. Invading microorganisms may attempt to
break down these substances chemically, using enzymes such as proteases that can cause structural damage to
create a point of entry for pathogens.
FIGURE 17.2 There are multiple types of cell junctions in human tissue, three of which are shown here. Tight junctions rivet two adjacent
cells together, preventing or limiting material exchange through the spaces between them. Desmosomes have intermediate fibers that act
like shoelaces, tying two cells together, allowing small materials to pass through the resulting spaces. Gap junctions are channels between
two cells that permit their communication via signals. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
The Skin Barrier
One of the body’s most important physical barriers is the skin barrier, which is composed of three layers of closely
packed cells. The thin upper layer is called the epidermis. A second, thicker layer, called the dermis, contains hair
follicles, sweat glands, nerves, and blood vessels. A layer of fatty tissue called the hypodermis lies beneath the
dermis and contains blood and lymph vessels (Figure 17.3).
=== PDF PAGE 676 ===
662 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
FIGURE 17.3 Human skin has three layers, the epidermis, the dermis, and the hypodermis, which provide a thick barrier between microbes
outside the body and deeper tissues. Dead skin cells on the surface of the epidermis are continually shed, taking with them microbes on the
skin’s surface. (credit: modification of work by National Institutes of Health)
The topmost layer of skin, the epidermis, consists of cells that are packed with keratin. These dead cells remain as a
tightly connected, dense layer of protein-filled cell husks on the surface of the skin. The keratin makes the skin’s
surface mechanically tough and resistant to degradation by bacterial enzymes. Fatty acids on the skin’s surface
create a dry, salty, and acidic environment that inhibits the growth of some microbes and is highly resistant to
breakdown by bacterial enzymes. In addition, the dead cells of the epidermis are frequently shed, along with any
microbes that may be clinging to them. Shed skin cells are continually replaced with new cells from below, providing
a new barrier that will soon be shed in the same way.
Infections can occur when the skin barrier is compromised or broken. A wound can serve as a point of entry for
opportunistic pathogens, which can infect the skin tissue surrounding the wound and possibly spread to deeper
tissues.
CASE IN POINT
Every Rose Has its Thorn
Mike, a gardener from southern California, recently noticed a small red bump on his left forearm. Initially, he did
not think much of it, but soon it grew larger and then ulcerated (opened up), becoming a painful lesion that
extended across a large part of his forearm (Figure 17.4). He went to an urgent care facility, where a physician
asked about his occupation. When he said he was a landscaper, the physician immediately suspected a case of
sporotrichosis, a type of fungal infection known as rose gardener’s disease because it often afflicts landscapers
and gardening enthusiasts.
Under most conditions, fungi cannot produce skin infections in healthy individuals. Fungi grow filaments known
as hyphae, which are not particularly invasive and can be easily kept at bay by the physical barriers of the skin
and mucous membranes. However, small wounds in the skin, such as those caused by thorns, can provide an
opening for opportunistic pathogens like Sporothrix schenkii, a soil-dwelling fungus and the causative agent of
rose gardener’s disease. Once it breaches the skin barrier, S. schenkii can infect the skin and underlying tissues,
producing ulcerated lesions like Mike’s. Compounding matters, other pathogens may enter the infected tissue,
causing secondary bacterial infections.
Luckily, rose gardener’s disease is treatable. Mike’s physician wrote him a prescription for some antifungal drugs
as well as a course of antibiotics to combat secondary bacterial infections. His lesions eventually healed, and
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 677 ===
17.1 • Physical Defenses 663
Mike returned to work with a new appreciation for gloves and protective clothing.
FIGURE 17.4 Rose gardener’s disease can occur when the fungus Sporothrix schenkii breaches the skin through small cuts, such as
might be inflicted by thorns. (credit left: modification of work by Elisa Self; credit right: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)
Mucous Membranes
The mucous membranes lining the nose, mouth, lungs, and urinary and digestive tracts provide another nonspecific
barrier against potential pathogens. Mucous membranes consist of a layer of epithelial cells bound by tight
junctions. The epithelial cells secrete a moist, sticky substance called mucus, which covers and protects the more
fragile cell layers beneath it and traps debris and particulate matter, including microbes. Mucus secretions also
contain antimicrobial peptides.
In many regions of the body, mechanical actions serve to flush mucus (along with trapped or dead microbes) out of
the body or away from potential sites of infection. For example, in the respiratory system, inhalation can bring
microbes, dust, mold spores, and other small airborne debris into the body. This debris becomes trapped in the
mucus lining the respiratory tract, a layer known as the mucociliary blanket. The epithelial cells lining the upper
parts of the respiratory tract are called ciliated epithelial cells because they have hair-like appendages known as
cilia. Movement of the cilia propels debris-laden mucus out and away from the lungs. The expelled mucus is then
swallowed and destroyed in the stomach, or coughed up, or sneezed out (Figure 17.5). This system of removal is
often called the mucociliary escalator.
FIGURE 17.5 This scanning electron micrograph shows ciliated and nonciliated epithelial cells from the human trachea. The mucociliary
escalator pushes mucus away from the lungs, along with any debris or microorganisms that may be trapped in the sticky mucus, and the
=== PDF PAGE 678 ===
664 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
mucus moves up to the esophagus where it can be removed by swallowing.
The mucociliary escalator is such an effective barrier to microbes that the lungs, the lowermost (and most sensitive)
portion of the respiratory tract, were long considered to be a sterile environment in healthy individuals. Only recently
has research suggested that healthy lungs may have a small normal microbiota. Disruption of the mucociliary
escalator by the damaging effects of smoking or diseases such as cystic fibrosis can lead to increased colonization
of bacteria in the lower respiratory tract and frequent infections, which highlights the importance of this physical
barrier to host defenses.
Like the respiratory tract, the digestive tract is a portal of entry through which microbes enter the body, and the
mucous membranes lining the digestive tract provide a nonspecific physical barrier against ingested microbes. The
intestinal tract is lined with epithelial cells, interspersed with mucus-secreting goblet cells (Figure 17.6). This mucus
mixes with material received from the stomach, trapping foodborne microbes and debris. The mechanical action of
peristalsis, a series of muscular contractions in the digestive tract, moves the sloughed mucus and other material
through the intestines, rectum, and anus, excreting the material in feces.
FIGURE 17.6 Goblet cells produce and secrete mucus. The arrows in this micrograph point to the mucus-secreting goblet cells
(magnification 1600⨯) in the intestinal epithelium. (credit micrograph: Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan
Medical School © 2012)
Endothelia
The epithelial cells lining the urogenital tract, blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and certain other tissues are known
as endothelia. These tightly packed cells provide a particularly effective frontline barrier against invaders. The
endothelia of the blood-brain barrier, for example, protect the central nervous system (CNS), which consists of the
brain and the spinal cord. The CNS is one of the most sensitive and important areas of the body, as microbial
infection of the CNS can quickly lead to serious and often fatal inflammation. The cell junctions in the blood vessels
traveling through the CNS are some of the tightest and toughest in the body, preventing any transient microbes in
the bloodstream from entering the CNS. This keeps the cerebrospinal fluid that surrounds and bathes the brain and
spinal cord sterile under normal conditions.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Describe how the mucociliary escalator functions.
• Name two places you would find endothelia.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 679 ===
17.1 • Physical Defenses 665
Mechanical Defenses
In addition to physical barriers that keep microbes out, the body has a number of mechanical defenses that
physically remove pathogens from the body, preventing them from taking up residence. We have already discussed
several examples of mechanical defenses, including the shedding of skin cells, the expulsion of mucus via the
mucociliary escalator, and the excretion of feces through intestinal peristalsis. Other important examples of
mechanical defenses include the flushing action of urine and tears, which both serve to carry microbes away from
the body. The flushing action of urine is largely responsible for keeping the urinary tract, which includes the kidneys,
ureters, and urinary bladder, free of transient microorganisms that may include pathogens. Urine passing out of the
body washes out transient microorganisms, preventing them from taking up residence. The eyes also have physical
barriers and mechanical mechanisms for preventing infections. The eyelashes and eyelids prevent dust and airborne
microorganisms from reaching the surface of the eye. Any microbes or debris that make it past these physical
barriers may be flushed out by the mechanical action of blinking, which bathes the eye in tears, washing debris away
(Figure 17.7).
FIGURE 17.7 Tears flush microbes away from the surface of the eye. Urine washes microbes out of the urinary tract as it passes through; as
a result, the urinary system is normally sterile.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Name two mechanical defenses that protect the eyes.
Microbiome
In various regions of the body, resident microbiota serve as an important first-line defense against invading
pathogens. Through their occupation of cellular binding sites and competition for available nutrients, the resident
microbiota prevent the critical early steps of pathogen attachment and proliferation required for the establishment
of an infection. For example, in the vagina, members of the resident microbiota compete with opportunistic
pathogens like the yeast Candida. This competition prevents infections by limiting the availability of nutrients, thus
inhibiting the growth of Candida, keeping its population in check. Similar competitions occur between the
=== PDF PAGE 680 ===
666 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
microbiota and potential pathogens on the skin, in the upper respiratory tract, and in the gastrointestinal tract. As
will be discussed later in this chapter, the resident microbiota also contribute to the chemical defenses of the innate
nonspecific host defenses.
The importance of the normal microbiota in host defenses is highlighted by the increased susceptibility to infectious
diseases when the microbiota is disrupted or eliminated. Treatment with antibiotics can significantly deplete the
normal microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract, providing an advantage for pathogenic bacteria to colonize and cause
diarrheal infection. In the case of diarrhea caused by Clostridioides difficile, the infection can be severe and
potentially lethal. One strategy for treating C. difficile infections is fecal transplantation, which involves the transfer
of fecal material from a donor (screened for potential pathogens) into the intestines of the recipient patient as a
method of restoring the normal microbiota and combating C. difficile infections.
Table 17.2 provides a summary of the physical defenses discussed in this section.
Physical Defenses of Nonspecific Innate Immunity
Defense Examples Function
Cellular Skin, mucous membranes, endothelial cells Deny entry to pathogens
barriers
Mechanical Shedding of skin cells, mucociliary sweeping, peristalsis, Remove pathogens from potential
defenses flushing action of urine and tears sites of infection
Microbiome Resident bacteria of the skin, upper respiratory tract, Compete with pathogens for cellular
gastrointestinal tract, and genitourinary tract binding sites and nutrients
TABLE 17.2
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• List two ways resident microbiota defend against pathogens.
17.2 Chemical Defenses
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how enzymes in body fluids provide protection against infection or disease
• List and describe the function of antimicrobial peptides, complement components, cytokines, and acute-
phase proteins
• Describe similarities and differences among classic, alternate, and lectin complement pathways
In addition to physical defenses, the innate nonspecific immune system uses a number of chemical mediators that
inhibit microbial invaders. The term “chemical mediators” encompasses a wide array of substances found in various
body fluids and tissues throughout the body. Chemical mediators may work alone or in conjunction with each other
to inhibit microbial colonization and infection.
Some chemical mediators are endogenously produced, meaning they are produced by human body cells; others are
produced exogenously, meaning that they are produced by certain microbes that are part of the microbiome. Some
mediators are produced continually, bathing the area in the antimicrobial substance; others are produced or
activated primarily in response to some stimulus, such as the presence of microbes.
Chemical and Enzymatic Mediators Found in Body Fluids
Fluids produced by the skin include examples of both endogenous and exogenous mediators. Sebaceous glands in
the dermis secrete an oil called sebum that is released onto the skin surface through hair follicles. This sebum is an
endogenous mediator, providing an additional layer of defense by helping seal off the pore of the hair follicle,
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 681 ===
17.2 • Chemical Defenses 667
preventing bacteria on the skin’s surface from invading sweat glands and surrounding tissue (Figure 17.8). Certain
members of the microbiome, such as the bacterium Cutibacterium acnes and the fungus Malassezia, among others,
can use lipase enzymes to degrade sebum, using it as a food source. This produces oleic acid, which creates a mildly
acidic environment on the surface of the skin that is inhospitable to many pathogenic microbes. Oleic acid is an
example of an exogenously produced mediator because it is produced by resident microbes and not directly by body
cells.
FIGURE 17.8 Sebaceous glands secrete sebum, a chemical mediator that lubricates and protect the skin from invading microbes. Sebum is
also a food source for resident microbes that produce oleic acid, an exogenously produced mediator. (credit micrograph: Micrograph
provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Environmental factors that affect the microbiota of the skin can have a direct impact on the production of chemical
mediators. Low humidity or decreased sebum production, for example, could make the skin less habitable for
microbes that produce oleic acid, thus making the skin more susceptible to pathogens normally inhibited by the
skin’s low pH. Many skin moisturizers are formulated to counter such effects by restoring moisture and essential oils
to the skin.
The digestive tract also produces a large number of chemical mediators that inhibit or kill microbes. In the oral
cavity, saliva contains mediators such as lactoperoxidase enzymes, and mucus secreted by the esophagus contains
the antibacterial enzyme lysozyme. In the stomach, highly acidic gastric fluid kills most microbes. In the lower
digestive tract, the intestines have pancreatic and intestinal enzymes, antibacterial peptides (cryptins), bile
produced from the liver, and specialized Paneth cells that produce lysozyme. Together, these mediators are able to
eliminate most pathogens that manage to survive the acidic environment of the stomach.
In the urinary tract, urine flushes microbes out of the body during urination. Furthermore, the slight acidity of urine
(the average pH is about 6) inhibits the growth of many microbes and potential pathogens in the urinary tract.
The female reproductive system employs lactate, an exogenously produced chemical mediator, to inhibit microbial
growth. The cells and tissue layers composing the vagina produce glycogen, a branched and more complex polymer
of glucose. Lactobacilli in the area ferment glycogen to produce lactate, lowering the pH in the vagina and inhibiting
transient microbiota, opportunistic pathogens like Candida (a yeast associated with vaginal infections), and other
pathogens responsible for sexually transmitted diseases.
In the eyes, tears contain the chemical mediators lysozyme and lactoferrin, both of which are capable of eliminating
microbes that have found their way to the surface of the eyes. Lysozyme cleaves the bond between NAG and NAM in
peptidoglycan, a component of the cell wall in bacteria. It is more effective against gram-positive bacteria, which
lack the protective outer membrane associated with gram-negative bacteria. Lactoferrin inhibits microbial growth by
chemically binding and sequestering iron. This effectually starves many microbes that require iron for growth.
In the ears, cerumen (earwax) exhibits antimicrobial properties due to the presence of fatty acids, which lower the
=== PDF PAGE 682 ===
668 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
pH to between 3 and 5.
The respiratory tract uses various chemical mediators in the nasal passages, trachea, and lungs. The mucus
produced in the nasal passages contains a mix of antimicrobial molecules similar to those found in tears and saliva
(e.g., lysozyme, lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase). Secretions in the trachea and lungs also contain lysozyme and
lactoferrin, as well as a diverse group of additional chemical mediators, such as the lipoprotein complex called
surfactant, which has antibacterial properties.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Explain the difference between endogenous and exogenous mediators
• Describe how pH affects antimicrobial defenses
Antimicrobial Peptides
The antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are a special class of nonspecific cell-derived mediators with broad-spectrum
antimicrobial properties. Some AMPs are produced routinely by the body, whereas others are primarily produced (or
produced in greater quantities) in response to the presence of an invading pathogen. Research has begun exploring
how AMPs can be used in the diagnosis and treatment of disease.
AMPs may induce cell damage in microorganisms in a variety of ways, including by inflicting damage to membranes,
destroying DNA and RNA, or interfering with cell-wall synthesis. Depending on the specific antimicrobial
mechanism, a particular AMP may inhibit only certain groups of microbes (e.g., gram-positive or gram-negative
bacteria) or it may be more broadly effective against bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and viruses. Many AMPs are found on
the skin, but they can also be found in other regions of the body.
A family of AMPs called defensins can be produced by epithelial cells throughout the body as well as by cellular
defenses such as macrophages and neutrophils (see Cellular Defenses). Defensins may be secreted or act inside
host cells; they combat microorganisms by damaging their plasma membranes. AMPs called bacteriocins are
produced exogenously by certain members of the resident microbiota within the gastrointestinal tract. The genes
coding for these types of AMPs are often carried on plasmids and can be passed between different species within
the resident microbiota through lateral or horizontal gene transfer.
There are numerous other AMPs throughout the body. The characteristics of a few of the more significant AMPs are
summarized in Table 17.3.
Characteristics of Selected Antimicrobial Peptides (AMPs)
AMP Secreted by Body site Pathogens Mode of action
inhibited
Bacteriocins Resident microbiota Gastrointestinal Bacteria Disrupt membrane
tract
Cathelicidin Epithelial cells, Skin Bacteria and fungi Disrupts membrane
macrophages, and other
cell types
Defensins Epithelial cells, Throughout the Fungi, bacteria, Disrupt membrane
macrophages, neutrophils body and many viruses
TABLE 17.3
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 683 ===
17.2 • Chemical Defenses 669
Characteristics of Selected Antimicrobial Peptides (AMPs)
AMP Secreted by Body site Pathogens Mode of action
inhibited
Dermcidin Sweat glands Skin Bacteria and fungi Disrupts membrane
integrity and ion
channels
Histatins Salivary glands Oral cavity Fungi Disrupt intracellular
function
TABLE 17.3
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Why are antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) considered nonspecific defenses?
Plasma Protein Mediators
Many nonspecific innate immune factors are found in plasma, the fluid portion of blood. Plasma contains
electrolytes, sugars, lipids, and proteins, each of which helps to maintain homeostasis (i.e., stable internal body
functioning), and contains the proteins involved in the clotting of blood. Additional proteins found in blood plasma,
such as acute-phase proteins, complement proteins, and cytokines, are involved in the nonspecific innate immune
response.
MICRO CONNECTIONS
Plasma versus Serum
There are two terms for the fluid portion of blood: plasma and serum. How do they differ if they are both fluid and
lack cells? The fluid portion of blood left over after coagulation (blood cell clotting) has taken place is serum.
Although molecules such as many vitamins, electrolytes, certain sugars, complement proteins, and antibodies are
still present in serum, clotting factors are largely depleted. Plasma, conversely, still contains all the clotting
elements. To obtain plasma from blood, an anticoagulant must be used to prevent clotting. Examples of
anticoagulants include heparin and ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA). Because clotting is inhibited, once
obtained, the sample must be gently spun down in a centrifuge. The heavier, denser blood cells form a pellet at the
bottom of a centrifuge tube, while the fluid plasma portion, which is lighter and less dense, remains above the cell
pellet.
Acute-Phase Proteins
The acute-phase proteins are another class of antimicrobial mediators. Acute-phase proteins are primarily
produced in the liver and secreted into the blood in response to inflammatory molecules from the immune system.
Examples of acute-phase proteins include C-reactive protein, serum amyloid A, ferritin, transferrin, fibrinogen, and
mannose-binding lectin. Each of these proteins has a different chemical structure and inhibits or destroys microbes
in some way (Table 17.4).
Some Acute-Phase Proteins and Their Functions
C-reactive protein
Coats bacteria (opsonization), preparing them for ingestion by phagocytes
Serum amyloid A
TABLE 17.4
=== PDF PAGE 684 ===
670 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
Some Acute-Phase Proteins and Their Functions
Ferritin
Bind and sequester iron, thereby inhibiting the growth of pathogens
Transferrin
Fibrinogen Involved in formation of blood clots that trap bacterial pathogens
Mannose-binding lectin Activates complement cascade
TABLE 17.4
The Complement System
The complement system is a group of plasma protein mediators that can act as an innate nonspecific defense while
also serving to connect innate and adaptive immunity (discussed in the next chapter). The complement system is
composed of more than 30 proteins (including C1 through C9) that normally circulate as precursor proteins in blood.
These precursor proteins become activated when stimulated or triggered by a variety of factors, including the
presence of microorganisms. Complement proteins are considered part of innate nonspecific immunity because
they are always present in the blood and tissue fluids, allowing them to be activated quickly. Also, when activated
through the alternative pathway (described later in this section), complement proteins target pathogens in a
nonspecific manner.
The process by which circulating complement precursors become functional is called complement activation. This
process is a cascade that can be triggered by one of three different mechanisms, known as the alternative, classical,
and lectin pathways.
The alternative pathway is initiated by the spontaneous activation of the complement protein C3. The hydrolysis of
C3 produces two products, C3a and C3b. When no invader microbes are present, C3b is very quickly degraded in a
hydrolysis reaction using the water in the blood. However, if invading microbes are present, C3b attaches to the
surface of these microbes. Once attached, C3b will recruit other complement proteins in a cascade (Figure 17.9).
The classical pathway provides a more efficient mechanism of activating the complement cascade, but it depends
upon the production of antibodies by the specific adaptive immune defenses. To initiate the classical pathway, a
specific antibody must first bind to the pathogen to form an antibody-antigen complex. This activates the first
protein in the complement cascade, the C1 complex. The C1 complex is a multipart protein complex, and each
component participates in the full activation of the overall complex. Following recruitment and activation of the C1
complex, the remaining classical pathway complement proteins are recruited and activated in a cascading sequence
(Figure 17.9).
The lectin activation pathway is similar to the classical pathway, but it is triggered by the binding of mannose-
binding lectin, an acute-phase protein, to carbohydrates on the microbial surface. Like other acute-phase proteins,
lectins are produced by liver cells and are commonly upregulated in response to inflammatory signals received by
the body during an infection (Figure 17.9).
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 685 ===
17.2 • Chemical Defenses 671
FIGURE 17.9 The three complement activation pathways have different triggers, as shown here, but all three result in the activation of the
complement protein C3, which produces C3a and C3b. The latter binds to the surface of the target cell and then works with other
complement proteins to cleave C5 into C5a and C5b. C5b also binds to the cell surface and then recruits C6 through C9; these molecules
form a ring structure called the membrane attack complex (MAC), which punches through the cell membrane of the invading pathogen,
causing it to swell and burst.
Although each complement activation pathway is initiated in a different way, they all provide the same protective
outcomes: opsonization, inflammation, chemotaxis, and cytolysis. The term opsonization refers to the coating of a
pathogen by a chemical substance (called an opsonin) that allows phagocytic cells to recognize, engulf, and destroy
it more easily. Opsonins from the complement cascade include C1q, C3b, and C4b. Additional important opsonins
include mannose-binding proteins and antibodies. The complement fragments C3a and C5a are well-characterized
anaphylatoxins with potent proinflammatory functions. Anaphylatoxins activate mast cells, causing degranulation
and the release of inflammatory chemical signals, including mediators that cause vasodilation and increased
vascular permeability. C5a is also one of the most potent chemoattractants for neutrophils and other white blood
cells, cellular defenses that will be discussed in the next section.
The complement proteins C6, C7, C8, and C9 assemble into a membrane attack complex (MAC), which allows C9
to polymerize into pores in the membranes of gram-negative bacteria. These pores allow water, ions, and other
molecules to move freely in and out of the targeted cells, eventually leading to cell lysis and death of the pathogen
(Figure 17.9). However, the MAC is only effective against gram-negative bacteria; it cannot penetrate the thick layer
of peptidoglycan associated with cell walls of gram-positive bacteria. Since the MAC does not pose a lethal threat to
gram-positive bacterial pathogens, complement-mediated opsonization is more important for their clearance.
Cytokines
Cytokines are soluble proteins that act as communication signals between cells. In a nonspecific innate immune
response, various cytokines may be released to stimulate production of chemical mediators or other cell functions,
such as cell proliferation, cell differentiation, inhibition of cell division, apoptosis, and chemotaxis.
When a cytokine binds to its target receptor, the effect can vary widely depending on the type of cytokine and the
type of cell or receptor to which it has bound. The function of a particular cytokine can be described as autocrine,
paracrine, or endocrine (Figure 17.10). In autocrine function, the same cell that releases the cytokine is the
recipient of the signal; in other words, autocrine function is a form of self-stimulation by a cell. In contrast,
paracrine function involves the release of cytokines from one cell to other nearby cells, stimulating some response
from the recipient cells. Last, endocrine function occurs when cells release cytokines into the bloodstream to be
carried to target cells much farther away.
=== PDF PAGE 686 ===
672 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
FIGURE 17.10 Autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine actions describe which cells are targeted by cytokines and how far the cytokines must
travel to bind to their intended target cells’ receptors.
Three important classes of cytokines are the interleukins, chemokines, and interferons. The interleukins were
originally thought to be produced only by leukocytes (white blood cells) and to only stimulate leukocytes, thus the
reasons for their name. Although interleukins are involved in modulating almost every function of the immune
system, their role in the body is not restricted to immunity. Interleukins are also produced by and stimulate a variety
of cells unrelated to immune defenses.
The chemokines are chemotactic factors that recruit leukocytes to sites of infection, tissue damage, and
inflammation. In contrast to more general chemotactic factors, like complement factor C5a, chemokines are very
specific in the subsets of leukocytes they recruit.
Interferons are a diverse group of immune signaling molecules and are especially important in our defense against
viruses. Type I interferons (interferon-α and interferon-β) are produced and released by cells infected with virus.
These interferons stimulate nearby cells to stop production of mRNA, destroy RNA already produced, and reduce
protein synthesis. These cellular changes inhibit viral replication and production of mature virus, slowing the spread
of the virus. Type I interferons also stimulate various immune cells involved in viral clearance to more aggressively
attack virus-infected cells. Type II interferon (interferon-γ) is an important activator of immune cells (Figure 17.11).
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 687 ===
17.2 • Chemical Defenses 673
FIGURE 17.11 Interferons are cytokines released by a cell infected with a virus. Interferon-α and interferon-β signal uninfected
neighboring cells to inhibit mRNA synthesis, destroy RNA, and reduce protein synthesis (top arrow). Interferon-α and interferon-β also
promote apoptosis in cells infected with the virus (middle arrow). Interferon-γ alerts neighboring immune cells to an attack (bottom arrow).
Although interferons do not cure the cell releasing them or other infected cells, which will soon die, their release may prevent additional
cells from becoming infected, thus stemming the infection.
Inflammation-Eliciting Mediators
Many of the chemical mediators discussed in this section contribute in some way to inflammation and fever, which
are nonspecific immune responses discussed in more detail in Inflammation and Fever. Cytokines stimulate the
production of acute-phase proteins such as C-reactive protein and mannose-binding lectin in the liver. These acute-
phase proteins act as opsonins, activating complement cascades through the lectin pathway.
Some cytokines also bind mast cells and basophils, inducing them to release histamine, a proinflammatory
compound. Histamine receptors are found on a variety of cells and mediate proinflammatory events, such as
bronchoconstriction (tightening of the airways) and smooth muscle contraction.
In addition to histamine, mast cells may release other chemical mediators, such as leukotrienes. Leukotrienes are
lipid-based proinflammatory mediators that are produced from the metabolism of arachidonic acid in the cell
membrane of leukocytes and tissue cells. Compared with the proinflammatory effects of histamine, those of
leukotrienes are more potent and longer lasting. Together, these chemical mediators can induce coughing, vomiting,
and diarrhea, which serve to expel pathogens from the body.
Certain cytokines also stimulate the production of prostaglandins, chemical mediators that promote the
inflammatory effects of kinins and histamines. Prostaglandins can also help to set the body temperature higher,
leading to fever, which promotes the activities of white blood cells and slightly inhibits the growth of pathogenic
microbes (see Inflammation and Fever).
Another inflammatory mediator, bradykinin, contributes to edema, which occurs when fluids and leukocytes leak
out of the bloodstream and into tissues. It binds to receptors on cells in the capillary walls, causing the capillaries to
dilate and become more permeable to fluids.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What do the three complement activation pathways have in common?
• Explain autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine signals.
• Name two important inflammation-eliciting mediators.
=== PDF PAGE 688 ===
674 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 2
To relieve the constriction of her airways, Angela is immediately treated with antihistamines and administered
corticosteroids through an inhaler, and then monitored for a period of time. Though her condition does not
worsen, the drugs do not seem to be alleviating her condition. She is admitted to the hospital for further
observation, testing, and treatment.
Following admission, a clinician conducts allergy testing to try to determine if something in her environment
might be triggering an allergic inflammatory response. A doctor orders blood analysis to check for levels of
particular cytokines. A sputum sample is also taken and sent to the lab for microbial staining, culturing, and
identification of pathogens that could be causing an infection.
• Which aspects of the innate immune system could be contributing to Angela’s airway constriction?
• Why was Angela treated with antihistamines?
• Why would the doctor be interested in levels of cytokines in Angela’s blood?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
Table 17.5 provides a summary of the chemical defenses discussed in this section.
Chemical Defenses of Nonspecific Innate Immunity
Defense Examples Function
Chemicals Sebum from sebaceous glands Provides oil barrier protecting hair follicle pores from
and enzymes pathogens
in body fluids
Oleic acid from sebum and skin Lowers pH to inhibit pathogens
microbiota
Lysozyme in secretions Kills bacteria by attacking cell wall
Acid in stomach, urine, and vagina Inhibits or kills bacteria
Digestive enzymes and bile Kill bacteria
Lactoferrin and transferrin Bind and sequester iron, inhibiting bacterial growth
Surfactant in lungs Kills bacteria
Antimicrobial Defensins, bacteriocins, dermcidin, Kill bacteria by attacking membranes or interfering with
peptides cathelicidin, histatins, cell functions
Plasma Acute-phase proteins (C-reactive Inhibit the growth of bacteria and assist in the trapping
protein protein, serum amyloid A, ferritin, and killing of bacteria
mediators fibrinogen, transferrin, and
mannose-binding lectin)
Complements C3b and C4b Opsonization of pathogens to aid phagocytosis
Complement C5a Chemoattractant for phagocytes
TABLE 17.5
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 689 ===
17.3 • Cellular Defenses 675
Chemical Defenses of Nonspecific Innate Immunity
Defense Examples Function
Complements C3a and C5a Proinflammatory anaphylatoxins
Cytokines Interleukins Stimulate and modulate most functions of immune
system
Chemokines Recruit white blood cells to infected area
Interferons Alert cells to viral infection, induce apoptosis of virus-
infected cells, induce antiviral defenses in infected and
nearby uninfected cells, stimulate immune cells to
attack virus-infected cells
Inflammation- Histamine Promotes vasodilation, bronchoconstriction, smooth
eliciting muscle contraction, increased secretion and mucus
mediators production
Leukotrienes Promote inflammation; stronger and longer lasting than
histamine
Prostaglandins Promote inflammation and fever
Bradykinin Increases vasodilation and vascular permeability,
leading to edema
TABLE 17.5
17.3 Cellular Defenses
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify and describe the components of blood
• Explain the process by which the formed elements of blood are formed (hematopoiesis)
• Describe the characteristics of formed elements found in peripheral blood, as well as their respective
functions within the innate immune system
In the previous section, we discussed some of the chemical mediators found in plasma, the fluid portion of blood.
The nonfluid portion of blood consists of various types of formed elements, so called because they are all formed
from the same stem cells found in bone marrow. The three major categories of formed elements are: red blood cells
(RBCs), also called erythrocytes; platelets, also called thrombocytes; and white blood cells (WBCs), also called
leukocytes.
Red blood cells are primarily responsible for carrying oxygen to tissues. Platelets are cellular fragments that
participate in blood clot formation and tissue repair. Several different types of WBCs participate in various
nonspecific mechanisms of innate and adaptive immunity. In this section, we will focus primarily on the innate
mechanisms of various types of WBCs.
Hematopoiesis
All of the formed elements of blood are derived from multipotent hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in the bone
marrow. As the HSCs make copies of themselves in the bone marrow, individual cells receive different cues from the
body that control how they develop and mature. As a result, the HSCs differentiate into different types of blood cells
that, once mature, circulate in peripheral blood. This process of differentiation, called hematopoiesis, is shown in
=== PDF PAGE 690 ===
676 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
more detail in Figure 17.12.
In terms of sheer numbers, the vast majority of HSCs become erythrocytes. Much smaller numbers become
leukocytes and platelets. Leukocytes can be further subdivided into granulocytes, which are characterized by
numerous granules visible in the cytoplasm, and agranulocytes, which lack granules. Figure 17.13 provides an
overview of the various types of formed elements, including their relative numbers, primary function, and lifespans.
FIGURE 17.12 All the formed elements of the blood arise by differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 691 ===
17.3 • Cellular Defenses 677
FIGURE 17.13 Formed elements of blood include erythrocytes (red blood cells), leukocytes (white blood cells), and platelets.
Granulocytes
The various types of granulocytes can be distinguished from one another in a blood smear by the appearance of
their nuclei and the contents of their granules, which confer different traits, functions, and staining properties. The
neutrophils, also called polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs), have a nucleus with three to five lobes and small,
numerous, lilac-colored granules. Each lobe of the nucleus is connected by a thin strand of material to the other
=== PDF PAGE 692 ===
678 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
lobes. The eosinophils have fewer lobes in the nucleus (typically 2–3) and larger granules that stain reddish-orange.
The basophils have a two-lobed nucleus and large granules that stain dark blue or purple (Figure 17.14).
FIGURE 17.14 Granulocytes can be distinguished by the number of lobes in their nuclei and the staining properties of their granules. (credit
“neutrophil” micrograph: modification of work by Ed Uthman)
Neutrophils (PMNs)
Neutrophils (PMNs) are frequently involved in the elimination and destruction of extracellular bacteria. They are
capable of migrating through the walls of blood vessels to areas of bacterial infection and tissue damage, where
they seek out and kill infectious bacteria. PMN granules contain a variety of defensins and hydrolytic enzymes that
help them destroy bacteria through phagocytosis (described in more detail in Pathogen Recognition and
Phagocytosis) In addition, when many neutrophils are brought into an infected area, they can be stimulated to
release toxic molecules into the surrounding tissue to better clear infectious agents. This is called degranulation.
Another mechanism used by neutrophils is neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), which are extruded meshes of
chromatin that are closely associated with antimicrobial granule proteins and components. Chromatin is DNA with
associated proteins (usually histone proteins, around which DNA wraps for organization and packing within a cell).
By creating and releasing a mesh or lattice-like structure of chromatin that is coupled with antimicrobial proteins,
the neutrophils can mount a highly concentrated and efficient attack against nearby pathogens. Proteins frequently
associated with NETs include lactoferrin, gelatinase, cathepsin G, and myeloperoxidase. Each has a different means
of promoting antimicrobial activity, helping neutrophils eliminate pathogens. The toxic proteins in NETs may kill
some of the body’s own cells along with invading pathogens. However, this collateral damage can be repaired after
the danger of the infection has been eliminated.
As neutrophils fight an infection, a visible accumulation of leukocytes, cellular debris, and bacteria at the site of
infection can be observed. This buildup is what we call pus (also known as purulent or suppurative discharge or
drainage). The presence of pus is a sign that the immune defenses have been activated against an infection;
historically, some physicians believed that inducing pus formation could actually promote the healing of wounds.
The practice of promoting “laudable pus” (by, for instance, wrapping a wound in greasy wool soaked in wine) dates
back to the ancient physician Galen in the 2nd century AD, and was practiced in variant forms until the 17th century
(though it was not universally accepted). Today, this method is no longer practiced because we now know that it is
not effective. Although a small amount of pus formation can indicate a strong immune response, artificially inducing
pus formation does not promote recovery.
Eosinophils
Eosinophils are granulocytes that protect against protozoa and helminths; they also play a role in allergic reactions.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 693 ===
17.3 • Cellular Defenses 679
The granules of eosinophils, which readily absorb the acidic reddish dye eosin, contain histamine, degradative
enzymes, and a compound known as major basic protein (MBP) (Figure 17.14). MBP binds to the surface
carbohydrates of parasites, and this binding is associated with disruption of the cell membrane and membrane
permeability.
Basophils
Basophils have cytoplasmic granules of varied size and are named for their granules’ ability to absorb the basic dye
methylene blue (Figure 17.14). Their stimulation and degranulation can result from multiple triggering events.
Activated complement fragments C3a and C5a, produced in the activation cascades of complement proteins, act as
anaphylatoxins by inducing degranulation of basophils and inflammatory responses. This cell type is important in
allergic reactions and other responses that involve inflammation. One of the most abundant components of basophil
granules is histamine, which is released along with other chemical factors when the basophil is stimulated. These
chemicals can be chemotactic and can help to open the gaps between cells in the blood vessels. Other mechanisms
for basophil triggering require the assistance of antibodies, as discussed in B Lymphocytes and Humoral Immunity.
Mast Cells
Hematopoiesis also gives rise to mast cells, which appear to be derived from the same common myeloid progenitor
cell as neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils. Functionally, mast cells are very similar to basophils, containing
many of the same components in their granules (e.g., histamine) and playing a similar role in allergic responses and
other inflammatory reactions. However, unlike basophils, mast cells leave the circulating blood and are most
frequently found residing in tissues. They are often associated with blood vessels and nerves or found close to
surfaces that interface with the external environment, such as the skin and mucous membranes in various regions of
the body (Figure 17.15).
FIGURE 17.15 Mast cells function similarly to basophils by inducing and promoting inflammatory responses. (a) This figure shows mast
cells in blood. In a blood smear, they are difficult to differentiate from basophils (b). Unlike basophils, mast cells migrate from the blood
into various tissues. (credit right: modification of work by Greenland JR, Xu X, Sayah DM, Liu FC, Jones KD, Looney MR, Caughey GH)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Describe the granules and nuclei of neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells.
• Name three antimicrobial mechanisms of neutrophils
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 3
Angela’s tests come back negative for all common allergens, and her sputum samples contain no abnormal
presence of pathogenic microbes or elevated levels of members of the normal respiratory microbiota. She does,
however, have elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines in her blood.
The swelling of her airway has still not responded to treatment with antihistamines or corticosteroids. Additional
=== PDF PAGE 694 ===
680 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
blood work shows that Angela has a mildly elevated white blood cell count but normal antibody levels. Also, she
has a lower-than-normal level of the complement protein C4.
• What does this new information reveal about the cause of Angela’s constricted airways?
• What are some possible conditions that could lead to low levels of complement proteins?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
Agranulocytes
As their name suggests, agranulocytes lack visible granules in the cytoplasm. Agranulocytes can be categorized as
lymphocytes or monocytes (Figure 17.13). Among the lymphocytes are natural killer cells, which play an important
role in nonspecific innate immune defenses. Lymphocytes also include the B cells and T cells, which are discussed
in the next chapter because they are central players in the specific adaptive immune defenses. The monocytes
differentiate into macrophages and dendritic cells, which are collectively referred to as the mononuclear phagocyte
system.
Natural Killer Cells
Most lymphocytes are primarily involved in the specific adaptive immune response, and thus will be discussed in the
following chapter. An exception is the natural killer cells (NK cells); these mononuclear lymphocytes use
nonspecific mechanisms to recognize and destroy cells that are abnormal in some way. Cancer cells and cells
infected with viruses are two examples of cellular abnormalities that are targeted by NK cells. Recognition of such
cells involves a complex process of identifying inhibitory and activating molecular markers on the surface of the
target cell. Molecular markers that make up the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) are expressed by healthy
cells as an indication of “self.” This will be covered in more detail in next chapter. NK cells are able to recognize
normal MHC markers on the surface of healthy cells, and these MHC markers serve as an inhibitory signal preventing
NK cell activation. However, cancer cells and virus-infected cells actively diminish or eliminate expression of MHC
markers on their surface. When these MHC markers are diminished or absent, the NK cell interprets this as an
abnormality and a cell in distress. This is one part of the NK cell activation process (Figure 17.16). NK cells are also
activated by binding to activating molecular molecules on the target cell. These activating molecular molecules
include “altered self” or “nonself” molecules. When a NK cell recognizes a decrease in inhibitory normal MHC
molecules and an increase in activating molecules on the surface of a cell, the NK cell will be activated to eliminate
the cell in distress.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 695 ===
17.3 • Cellular Defenses 681
FIGURE 17.16 Natural killer (NK) cells are inhibited by the presence of the major histocompatibility cell (MHC) receptor on healthy cells.
Cancer cells and virus-infected cells have reduced expression of MHC and increased expression of activating molecules. When a NK cell
recognizes decreased MHC and increased activating molecules, it will kill the abnormal cell.
Once a cell has been recognized as a target, the NK cell can use several different mechanisms to kill its target. For
example, it may express cytotoxic membrane proteins and cytokines that stimulate the target cell to undergo
apoptosis, or controlled cell suicide. NK cells may also use perforin-mediated cytotoxicity to induce apoptosis in
target cells. This mechanism relies on two toxins released from granules in the cytoplasm of the NK cell: perforin, a
protein that creates pores in the target cell, and granzymes, proteases that enter through the pores into the target
cell’s cytoplasm, where they trigger a cascade of protein activation that leads to apoptosis. The NK cell binds to the
abnormal target cell, releases its destructive payload, and detaches from the target cell. While the target cell
undergoes apoptosis, the NK cell synthesizes more perforin and proteases to use on its next target.
NK cells contain these toxic compounds in granules in their cytoplasm. When stained, the granules are azurophilic
and can be visualized under a light microscope (Figure 17.17). Even though they have granules, NK cells are not
considered granulocytes because their granules are far less numerous than those found in true granulocytes.
Furthermore, NK cells have a different lineage than granulocytes, arising from lymphoid rather than myeloid stem
cells (Figure 17.12).
=== PDF PAGE 696 ===
682 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
FIGURE 17.17 Natural killer cell with perforin-containing granules. (credit: modification of work by Rolstad B)
Monocytes
The largest of the white blood cells, monocytes have a nucleus that lacks lobes, and they also lack granules in the
cytoplasm (Figure 17.18). Nevertheless, they are effective phagocytes, engulfing pathogens and apoptotic cells to
help fight infection.
When monocytes leave the bloodstream and enter a specific body tissue, they differentiate into tissue-specific
phagocytes called macrophages and dendritic cells. They are particularly important residents of lymphoid tissue,
as well as nonlymphoid sites and organs. Macrophages and dendritic cells can reside in body tissues for significant
lengths of time. Macrophages in specific body tissues develop characteristics suited to the particular tissue. Not only
do they provide immune protection for the tissue in which they reside but they also support normal function of their
neighboring tissue cells through the production of cytokines. Macrophages are given tissue-specific names, and a
few examples of tissue-specific macrophages are listed in Table 17.6. Dendritic cells are important sentinels
residing in the skin and mucous membranes, which are portals of entry for many pathogens. Monocytes,
macrophages, and dendritic cells are all highly phagocytic and important promoters of the immune response
through their production and release of cytokines. These cells provide an essential bridge between innate and
adaptive immune responses, as discussed in the next section as well as the next chapter.
FIGURE 17.18 Monocytes are large, agranular white blood cells with a nucleus that lacks lobes. When monocytes leave the bloodstream,
they differentiate and become macrophages with tissue-specific properties. (credit left: modification of work by Armed Forces Institute of
Pathology; credit right: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 697 ===
17.4 • Pathogen Recognition and Phagocytosis 683
Macrophages Found in Various Body Tissues
Tissue Macrophage
Brain and central nervous system Microglial cells
Liver Kupffer cells
Lungs Alveolar macrophages (dust cells)
Peritoneal cavity Peritoneal macrophages
TABLE 17.6
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Describe the signals that activate natural killer cells.
• What is the difference between monocytes and macrophages?
17.4 Pathogen Recognition and Phagocytosis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how leukocytes migrate from peripheral blood into infected tissues
• Explain the mechanisms by which leukocytes recognize pathogens
• Explain the process of phagocytosis and the mechanisms by which phagocytes destroy and degrade
pathogens
Several of the cell types discussed in the previous section can be described as phagocytes—cells whose main
function is to seek, ingest, and kill pathogens. This process, called phagocytosis, was first observed in starfish in the
1880s by Nobel Prize-winning zoologist Ilya Metchnikoff (1845–1916), who made the connection to white blood
cells (WBCs) in humans and other animals. At the time, Pasteur and other scientists believed that WBCs were
spreading pathogens rather than killing them (which is true for some diseases, such as tuberculosis). But in most
cases, phagocytes provide a strong, swift, and effective defense against a broad range of microbes, making them a
critical component of innate nonspecific immunity. This section will focus on the mechanisms by which phagocytes
are able to seek, recognize, and destroy pathogens.
Extravasation (Diapedesis) of Leukocytes
Some phagocytes are leukocytes (WBCs) that normally circulate in the bloodstream. To reach pathogens located in
infected tissue, leukocytes must pass through the walls of small capillary blood vessels within tissues. This process,
called extravasation, or diapedesis, is initiated by complement factor C5a, as well as cytokines released into the
immediate vicinity by resident macrophages and tissue cells responding to the presence of the infectious agent
(Figure 17.19). Similar to C5a, many of these cytokines are proinflammatory and chemotactic, and they bind to cells
of small capillary blood vessels, initiating a response in the endothelial cells lining the inside of the blood vessel
walls. This response involves the upregulation and expression of various cellular adhesion molecules and receptors.
Leukocytes passing through will stick slightly to the adhesion molecules, slowing down and rolling along the blood
vessel walls near the infected area. When they reach a cellular junction, they will bind to even more of these
adhesion molecules, flattening out and squeezing through the cellular junction in a process known as
transendothelial migration. This mechanism of “rolling adhesion” allows leukocytes to exit the bloodstream and
enter the infected areas, where they can begin phagocytosing the invading pathogens.
Note that extravasation does not occur in arteries or veins. These blood vessels are surrounded by thicker,
multilayer protective walls, in contrast to the thin single-cell-layer walls of capillaries. Furthermore, the blood flow
in arteries is too turbulent to allow for rolling adhesion. Also, some leukocytes tend to respond to an infection more
=== PDF PAGE 698 ===
684 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
quickly than others. The first to arrive typically are neutrophils, often within hours of a bacterial infection. By
contract, monocytes may take several days to leave the bloodstream and differentiate into macrophages.
FIGURE 17.19 Damaged cells and macrophages that have ingested pathogens release cytokines that are proinflammatory and chemotactic
for leukocytes. In addition, activation of complement at the site of infection results in production of the chemotactic and proinflammatory
C5a. Leukocytes exit the blood vessel and follow the chemoattractant signal of cytokines and C5a to the site of infection. Granulocytes such
as neutrophils release chemicals that destroy pathogens. They are also capable of phagocytosis and intracellular killing of bacterial
pathogens.
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch the following videos on leukocyte extravasation (https://openstax.org/l/22leukextrvid) and leukocyte rolling
(https://openstax.org/l/22leukrollvid) to learn more.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 699 ===
17.4 • Pathogen Recognition and Phagocytosis 685
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Explain the role of adhesion molecules in the process of extravasation.
Pathogen Recognition
As described in the previous section, opsonization of pathogens by antibody; complement factors C1q, C3b, and
C4b; and lectins can assist phagocytic cells in recognition of pathogens and attachment to initiate phagocytosis.
However, not all pathogen recognition is opsonin dependent. Phagocytes can also recognize molecular structures
that are common to many groups of pathogenic microbes. Such structures are called pathogen-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPs). Common PAMPs include the following:
• peptidoglycan, found in bacterial cell walls;
• flagellin, a protein found in bacterial flagella;
• lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria;
• lipopeptides, molecules expressed by most bacteria; and
• nucleic acids such as viral DNA or RNA.
Like numerous other PAMPs, these substances are integral to the structure of broad classes of microbes.
The structures that allow phagocytic cells to detect PAMPs are called pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). One
group of PRRs is the toll-like receptors (TLRs), which bind to various PAMPs and communicate with the nucleus of
the phagocyte to elicit a response. Many TLRs (and other PRRs) are located on the surface of a phagocyte, but some
can also be found embedded in the membranes of interior compartments and organelles (Figure 17.20). These
interior PRRs can be useful for the binding and recognition of intracellular pathogens that may have gained access to
the inside of the cell before phagocytosis could take place. Viral nucleic acids, for example, might encounter an
interior PRR, triggering production of the antiviral cytokine interferon.
In addition to providing the first step of pathogen recognition, the interaction between PAMPs and PRRs on
macrophages provides an intracellular signal that activates the phagocyte, causing it to transition from a dormant
state of readiness and slow proliferation to a state of hyperactivity, proliferation, production/secretion of cytokines,
and enhanced intracellular killing. PRRs on macrophages also respond to chemical distress signals from damaged or
stressed cells. This allows macrophages to extend their responses beyond protection from infectious diseases to a
broader role in the inflammatory response initiated from injuries or other diseases.
=== PDF PAGE 700 ===
686 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
FIGURE 17.20 Phagocytic cells contain pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) capable of recognizing various pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs). These PRRs can be found on the plasma membrane or in internal phagosomes. When a PRR recognizes a PAMP, it sends
a signal to the nucleus that activates genes involved in phagocytosis, cellular proliferation, production and secretion of antiviral interferons
and proinflammatory cytokines, and enhanced intracellular killing.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Name four pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs).
• Describe the process of phagocyte activation.
Pathogen Degradation
Once pathogen recognition and attachment occurs, the pathogen is engulfed in a vesicle and brought into the
internal compartment of the phagocyte in a process called phagocytosis (Figure 17.21). PRRs can aid in
phagocytosis by first binding to the pathogen’s surface, but phagocytes are also capable of engulfing nearby items
even if they are not bound to specific receptors. To engulf the pathogen, the phagocyte forms a pseudopod that
wraps around the pathogen and then pinches it off into a membrane vesicle called a phagosome. Acidification of the
phagosome (pH decreases to the range of 4–5) provides an important early antibacterial mechanism. The
phagosome containing the pathogen fuses with one or more lysosomes, forming a phagolysosome. Formation of the
phagolysosome enhances the acidification, which is essential for activation of pH-dependent digestive lysosomal
enzymes and production of hydrogen peroxide and toxic reactive oxygen species. Lysosomal enzymes such as
lysozyme, phospholipase, and proteases digest the pathogen. Other enzymes are involved in a respiratory burst.
During the respiratory burst, phagocytes will increase their uptake and consumption of oxygen, but not for energy
production. The increased oxygen consumption is focused on the production of superoxide anion, hydrogen
peroxide, hydroxyl radicals, and other reactive oxygen species that are antibacterial.
In addition to the reactive oxygen species produced by the respiratory burst, reactive nitrogen compounds with
cytotoxic (cell-killing) potential can also form. For example, nitric oxide can react with superoxide to form
peroxynitrite, a highly reactive nitrogen compound with degrading capabilities similar to those of the reactive oxygen
species. Some phagocytes even contain an internal storehouse of microbicidal defensin proteins (e.g., neutrophil
granules). These destructive forces can be released into the area around the cell to degrade microbes externally.
Neutrophils, especially, can be quite efficient at this secondary antimicrobial mechanism.
Once degradation is complete, leftover waste products are excreted from the cell in an exocytic vesicle. However, it
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 701 ===
17.4 • Pathogen Recognition and Phagocytosis 687
is important to note that not all remains of the pathogen are excreted as waste. Macrophages and dendritic cells are
also antigen-presenting cells involved in the specific adaptive immune response. These cells further process the
remains of the degraded pathogen and present key antigens (specific pathogen proteins) on their cellular surface.
This is an important step for stimulation of some adaptive immune responses, as will be discussed in more detail in
the next chapter.
FIGURE 17.21 The stages of phagocytosis include the engulfment of a pathogen, the formation of a phagosome, the digestion of the
pathogenic particle in the phagolysosome, and the expulsion of undigested materials from the cell.
LINK TO LEARNING
Visit this link (https://openstax.org/l/22phagpathvid) to view a phagocyte chasing and engulfing a pathogen.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What is the difference between a phagosome and a lysosome?
MICRO CONNECTIONS
When Phagocytosis Fails
Although phagocytosis successfully destroys many pathogens, some are able to survive and even exploit this
defense mechanism to multiply in the body and cause widespread infection. Protozoans of the genus Leishmania
are one example. These obligate intracellular parasites are flagellates transmitted to humans by the bite of a sand
fly. Infections cause serious and sometimes disfiguring sores and ulcers in the skin and other tissues (Figure 17.22).
1
Worldwide, an estimated 1.3 million people are newly infected with leishmaniasis annually.
Salivary peptides from the sand fly activate host macrophages at the site of their bite. The classic or alternate
pathway for complement activation ensues with C3b opsonization of the parasite. Leishmania cells are
phagocytosed, lose their flagella, and multiply in a form known as an amastigote (Leishman-Donovan body) within
the phagolysosome. Although many other pathogens are destroyed in the phagolysosome, survival of the
Leishmania amastigotes is maintained by the presence of surface lipophosphoglycan and acid phosphatase. These
substances inhibit the macrophage respiratory burst and lysosomal enzymes. The parasite then multiplies inside the
cell and lyses the infected macrophage, releasing the amastigotes to infect other macrophages within the same
host. Should another sand fly bite an infected person, it might ingest amastigotes and then transmit them to another
individual through another bite.
There are several different forms of leishmaniasis. The most common is a localized cutaneous form of the illness
caused by L. tropica, which typically resolves spontaneously over time but with some significant lymphocyte
infiltration and permanent scarring. A mucocutaneous form of the disease, caused by L. viannia brasilienfsis,
1 World Health Organization. “Leishmaniasis.” 2016. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs375/en/.
=== PDF PAGE 702 ===
688 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
produces lesions in the tissue of the nose and mouth and can be life threatening. A visceral form of the illness can
be caused by several of the different Leishmania species. It affects various organ systems and causes abnormal
enlargement of the liver and spleen. Irregular fevers, anemia, liver dysfunction, and weight loss are all signs and
symptoms of visceral leishmaniasis. If left untreated, it is typically fatal.
FIGURE 17.22 (a) Cutaneous leishmaniasis is a disfiguring disease caused by the intracellular flagellate Leishmania tropica, transmitted by
the bite of a sand fly. (b) This light micrograph of a sample taken from a skin lesion shows a large cell, which is a macrophage infected with
L. tropica amastigotes (arrows). The amastigotes have lost their flagella but their nuclei are visible. Soon the amastigotes will lyse the
macrophage and be engulfed by other phagocytes, spreading the infection. (credit a: modification of work by Otis Historical Archives of
“National Museum of Health & Medicine”; credit b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
17.5 Inflammation and Fever
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the signs of inflammation and fever and explain why they occur
• Explain the advantages and risks posed by inflammatory responses
The inflammatory response, or inflammation, is triggered by a cascade of chemical mediators and cellular
responses that may occur when cells are damaged and stressed or when pathogens successfully breach the
physical barriers of the innate immune system. Although inflammation is typically associated with negative
consequences of injury or disease, it is a necessary process insofar as it allows for recruitment of the cellular
defenses needed to eliminate pathogens, remove damaged and dead cells, and initiate repair mechanisms.
Excessive inflammation, however, can result in local tissue damage and, in severe cases, may even become deadly.
Acute Inflammation
An early, if not immediate, response to tissue injury is acute inflammation. Immediately following an injury,
vasoconstriction of blood vessels will occur to minimize blood loss. The amount of vasoconstriction is related to the
amount of vascular injury, but it is usually brief. Vasoconstriction is followed by vasodilation and increased vascular
permeability, as a direct result of the release of histamine from resident mast cells. Increased blood flow and
vascular permeability can dilute toxins and bacterial products at the site of injury or infection. They also contribute
to the five observable signs associated with the inflammatory response: erythema (redness), edema (swelling),
heat, pain, and altered function. Vasodilation and increased vascular permeability are also associated with an influx
of phagocytes at the site of injury and/or infection. This can enhance the inflammatory response because
phagocytes may release proinflammatory chemicals when they are activated by cellular distress signals released
from damaged cells, by PAMPs, or by opsonins on the surface of pathogens. Activation of the complement system
can further enhance the inflammatory response through the production of the anaphylatoxin C5a. Figure 17.23
illustrates a typical case of acute inflammation at the site of a skin wound.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 703 ===
17.5 • Inflammation and Fever 689
FIGURE 17.23 (a) Mast cells detect injury to nearby cells and release histamine, initiating an inflammatory response. (b) Histamine
increases blood flow to the wound site, and increased vascular permeability allows fluid, proteins, phagocytes, and other immune cells to
enter infected tissue. These events result in the swelling and reddening of the injured site, and the increased blood flow to the injured site
causes it to feel warm. Inflammation is also associated with pain due to these events stimulating nerve pain receptors in the tissue. The
interaction of phagocyte PRRs with cellular distress signals and PAMPs and opsonins on the surface of pathogens leads to the release of
more proinflammatory chemicals, enhancing the inflammatory response.
During the period of inflammation, the release of bradykinin causes capillaries to remain dilated, flooding tissues
with fluids and leading to edema. Increasing numbers of neutrophils are recruited to the area to fight pathogens. As
the fight rages on, pus forms from the accumulation of neutrophils, dead cells, tissue fluids, and lymph. Typically,
after a few days, macrophages will help to clear out this pus. Eventually, tissue repair can begin in the wounded
area.
Chronic Inflammation
When acute inflammation is unable to clear an infectious pathogen, chronic inflammation may occur. This often
results in an ongoing (and sometimes futile) lower-level battle between the host organism and the pathogen. The
wounded area may heal at a superficial level, but pathogens may still be present in deeper tissues, stimulating
ongoing inflammation. Additionally, chronic inflammation may be involved in the progression of degenerative
neurological diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s, heart disease, and metastatic cancer.
Chronic inflammation may lead to the formation of granulomas, pockets of infected tissue walled off and
surrounded by WBCs. Macrophages and other phagocytes wage an unsuccessful battle to eliminate the pathogens
and dead cellular materials within a granuloma. One example of a disease that produces chronic inflammation is
tuberculosis, which results in the formation of granulomas in lung tissues. A tubercular granuloma is called a
tubercle (Figure 17.24). Tuberculosis will be covered in more detail in Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract.
Chronic inflammation is not just associated with bacterial infections. Chronic inflammation can be an important
cause of tissue damage from viral infections. The extensive scarring observed with hepatitis C infections and liver
cirrhosis is the result of chronic inflammation.
FIGURE 17.24 A tubercle is a granuloma in the lung tissue of a patient with tuberculosis. In this micrograph, white blood cells (stained
purple) have walled off a pocket of tissue infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Granulomas also occur in many other forms of
disease. (credit: modification of work by Piotrowski WJ, Górski P, Duda-Szymańska J, Kwiatkowska S)
=== PDF PAGE 704 ===
690 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Name the five signs of inflammation.
• Is a granuloma an acute or chronic form of inflammation? Explain.
MICRO CONNECTIONS
Chronic Edema
In addition to granulomas, chronic inflammation can also result in long-term edema. A condition known as
lymphatic filariasis (also known as elephantiasis) provides an extreme example. Lymphatic filariasis is caused by
microscopic nematodes (parasitic worms) whose larvae are transmitted between human hosts by mosquitoes. Adult
worms live in the lymphatic vessels, where their presence stimulates infiltration by lymphocytes, plasma cells,
eosinophils, and thrombocytes (a condition known as lymphangitis). Because of the chronic nature of the illness,
granulomas, fibrosis, and blocking of the lymphatic system may eventually occur. Over time, these blockages may
worsen with repeated infections over decades, leading to skin thickened with edema and fibrosis. Lymph
(extracellular tissue fluid) may spill out of the lymphatic areas and back into tissues, causing extreme swelling
(Figure 17.25). Secondary bacterial infections commonly follow. Because it is a disease caused by a parasite,
eosinophilia (a dramatic rise in the number of eosinophils in the blood) is characteristic of acute infection. However,
this increase in antiparasite granulocytes is not sufficient to clear the infection in many cases.
2
Lymphatic filariasis affects an estimated 120 million people worldwide, mostly concentrated in Africa and Asia.
Improved sanitation and mosquito control can reduce transmission rates.
FIGURE 17.25 Elephantiasis (chronic edema) of the legs due to filariasis. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)
Fever
A fever is an inflammatory response that extends beyond the site of infection and affects the entire body, resulting
in an overall increase in body temperature. Body temperature is normally regulated and maintained by the
hypothalamus, an anatomical section of the brain that functions to maintain homeostasis in the body. However,
2 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Parasites–Lymphatic Filiariasis.” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/lymphaticfilariasis/
gen_info/faqs.html.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 705 ===
17.5 • Inflammation and Fever 691
certain bacterial or viral infections can result in the production of pyrogens, chemicals that effectively alter the
“thermostat setting” of the hypothalamus to elevate body temperature and cause fever. Pyrogens may be
exogenous or endogenous. For example, the endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS), produced by gram-negative
bacteria, is an exogenous pyrogen that may induce the leukocytes to release endogenous pyrogens such as
interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6, interferon-γ (IFN-γ), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF). In a cascading effect, these
molecules can then lead to the release of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) from other cells, resetting the hypothalamus to
initiate fever (Figure 17.26).
FIGURE 17.26 The role of the hypothalamus in the inflammatory response. Macrophages recognize pathogens in an area and release
cytokines that trigger inflammation. The cytokines also send a signal up the vagus nerve to the hypothalamus.
Like other forms of inflammation, a fever enhances the innate immune defenses by stimulating leukocytes to kill
pathogens. The rise in body temperature also may inhibit the growth of many pathogens since human pathogens are
mesophiles with optimum growth occurring around 35 °C (95 °F). In addition, some studies suggest that fever may
also stimulate release of iron-sequestering compounds from the liver, thereby starving out microbes that rely on iron
3
for growth.
During fever, the skin may appear pale due to vasoconstriction of the blood vessels in the skin, which is mediated by
the hypothalamus to divert blood flow away from extremities, minimizing the loss of heat and raising the core
temperature. The hypothalamus will also stimulate shivering of muscles, another effective mechanism of generating
heat and raising the core temperature.
The crisis phase occurs when the fever breaks. The hypothalamus stimulates vasodilation, resulting in a return of
blood flow to the skin and a subsequent release of heat from the body. The hypothalamus also stimulates sweating,
which cools the skin as the sweat evaporates.
Although a low-level fever may help an individual overcome an illness, in some instances, this immune response can
be too strong, causing tissue and organ damage and, in severe cases, even death. The inflammatory response to
bacterial superantigens is one scenario in which a life-threatening fever may develop. Superantigens are bacterial or
viral proteins that can cause an excessive activation of T cells from the specific adaptive immune defense, as well as
an excessive release of cytokines that overstimulates the inflammatory response. For example, Staphylococcus
aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes are capable of producing superantigens that cause toxic shock syndrome and
scarlet fever, respectively. Both of these conditions can be associated with very high, life-threatening fevers in
excess of 42 °C (108 °F).
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Explain the difference between exogenous and endogenous pyrogens.
3 N. Parrow et al. “Sequestration and Scavenging of Iron in Infection.” Infection and Immunity 81 no. 10 (2013):3503–3514
=== PDF PAGE 706 ===
692 17 • Innate Nonspecific Host Defenses
• How does a fever inhibit pathogens?
CLINICAL FOCUS
Resolution
Given her father’s premature death, Angela’s doctor suspects that she has hereditary angioedema, a genetic
disorder that compromises the function of C1 inhibitor protein. Patients with this genetic abnormality may have
occasional episodes of swelling in various parts of the body. In Angela’s case, the swelling has occurred in the
respiratory tract, leading to difficulty breathing. Swelling may also occur in the gastrointestinal tract, causing
abdominal cramping, diarrhea, and vomiting, or in the muscles of the face or limbs. This swelling may be
nonresponsive to steroid treatment and is often misdiagnosed as an allergy.
Because there are three types of hereditary angioedema, the doctor orders a more specific blood test to look for
levels of C1-INH, as well as a functional assay of Angela’s C1 inhibitors. The results suggest that Angela has type
I hereditary angioedema, which accounts for 80%–85% of all cases. This form of the disorder is caused by a
deficiency in C1 esterase inhibitors, the proteins that normally help suppress activation of the complement
system. When these proteins are deficient or nonfunctional, overstimulation of the system can lead to
production of inflammatory anaphylatoxins, which results in swelling and fluid buildup in tissues.
There is no cure for hereditary angioedema, but timely treatment with purified and concentrated C1-INH from
blood donors can be effective, preventing tragic outcomes like the one suffered by Angela’s father. A number of
therapeutic drugs, either currently approved or in late-stage human trials, may also be considered as options for
treatment in the near future. These drugs work by inhibiting inflammatory molecules or the receptors for
inflammatory molecules.
Thankfully, Angela’s condition was quickly diagnosed and treated. Although she may experience additional
episodes in the future, her prognosis is good and she can expect to live a relatively normal life provided she
seeks treatment at the onset of symptoms.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 707 ===
17 • Summary 693
Summary
17.1 Physical Defenses (MAC).
• Cytokines are proteins that facilitate various
• Nonspecific innate immunity provides a first
nonspecific responses by innate immune cells,
line of defense against infection by
including production of other chemical
nonspecifically blocking entry of microbes and
mediators, cell proliferation, cell death, and
targeting them for destruction or removal from
differentiation.
the body.
• Cytokines play a key role in the inflammatory
• The physical defenses of innate immunity include
response, triggering production of inflammation-
physical barriers, mechanical actions that
eliciting mediators such as acute-phase proteins,
remove microbes and debris, and the
histamine, leukotrienes, prostaglandins, and
microbiome, which competes with and inhibits
bradykinin.
the growth of pathogens.
• The skin, mucous membranes, and endothelia 17.3 Cellular Defenses
throughout the body serve as physical barriers
• The formed elements of the blood include red
that prevent microbes from reaching potential
blood cells (erythrocytes), white blood cells
sites of infection. Tight cell junctions in these
(leukocytes), and platelets (thrombocytes). Of
tissues prevent microbes from passing through.
these, leukocytes are primarily involved in the
• Microbes trapped in dead skin cells or mucus are
immune response.
removed from the body by mechanical actions
• All formed elements originate in the bone
such as shedding of skin cells, mucociliary
marrow as stem cells (HSCs) that differentiate
sweeping, coughing, peristalsis, and flushing of
through hematopoiesis.
bodily fluids (e.g., urination, tears)
• Granulocytes are leukocytes characterized by a
• The resident microbiota provide a physical
lobed nucleus and granules in the cytoplasm.
defense by occupying available cellular binding
These include neutrophils (PMNs), eosinophils,
sites and competing with pathogens for available
and basophils.
nutrients.
• Neutrophils are the leukocytes found in the
17.2 Chemical Defenses largest numbers in the bloodstream and they
primarily fight bacterial infections.
• Numerous chemical mediators produced
• Eosinophils target parasitic infections.
endogenously and exogenously exhibit
Eosinophils and basophils are involved in allergic
nonspecific antimicrobial functions.
reactions. Both release histamine and other
• Many chemical mediators are found in body
proinflammatory compounds from their granules
fluids such as sebum, saliva, mucus, gastric and
upon stimulation.
intestinal fluids, urine, tears, cerumen, and
• Mast cells function similarly to basophils but can
vaginal secretions.
be found in tissues outside the bloodstream.
• Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) found on the
• Natural killer (NK) cells are lymphocytes that
skin and in other areas of the body are largely
recognize and kill abnormal or infected cells by
produced in response to the presence of
releasing proteins that trigger apoptosis.
pathogens. These include dermcidin,
• Monocytes are large, mononuclear leukocytes
cathelicidin, defensins, histatins, and
that circulate in the bloodstream. They may leave
bacteriocins.
the bloodstream and take up residence in body
• Plasma contains various proteins that serve as
tissues, where they differentiate and become
chemical mediators, including acute-phase
tissue-specific macrophages and dendritic
proteins, complement proteins, and cytokines.
cells.
• The complement system involves numerous
precursor proteins that circulate in plasma. 17.4 Pathogen Recognition and
These proteins become activated in a cascading Phagocytosis
sequence in the presence of microbes, resulting
• Phagocytes are cells that recognize pathogens
in the opsonization of pathogens,
and destroy them through phagocytosis.
chemoattraction of leukocytes, induction of
• Recognition often takes place by the use of
inflammation, and cytolysis through the
phagocyte receptors that bind molecules
formation of a membrane attack complex
=== PDF PAGE 708 ===
694 17 • Review Questions
commonly found on pathogens, known as defenses to an injury or infection.
pathogen-associated molecular patterns • Acute inflammation is short lived and localized
(PAMPs). to the site of injury or infection. Chronic
• The receptors that bind PAMPs are called inflammation occurs when the inflammatory
pattern recognition receptors, or PRRs. Toll- response is unsuccessful, and may result in the
like receptors (TLRs) are one type of PRR found formation of granulomas (e.g., with tuberculosis)
on phagocytes. and scarring (e.g., with hepatitis C viral infections
• Extravasation of white blood cells from the and liver cirrhosis).
bloodstream into infected tissue occurs through • The five cardinal signs of inflammation are
the process of transendothelial migration. erythema, edema, heat, pain, and altered
• Phagocytes degrade pathogens through function. These largely result from innate
phagocytosis, which involves engulfing the responses that draw increased blood flow to the
pathogen, killing and digesting it within a injured or infected tissue.
phagolysosome, and then excreting undigested • Fever is a system-wide sign of inflammation that
matter. raises the body temperature and stimulates the
immune response.
17.5 Inflammation and Fever
• Both inflammation and fever can be harmful if
• Inflammation results from the collective the inflammatory response is too severe.
response of chemical mediators and cellular
Review Questions
Multiple Choice
1 . Which of the following best describes the innate nonspecific defenses?
nonspecific immune system? A. cytokines
A. a targeted and highly specific response to B. antimicrobial peptides
a single pathogen or molecule C. complement proteins
B. a generalized and nonspecific set of D. antibodies
defenses against a class or group of
pathogens 5 . Bacteriocins and defensins are types of which of
C. a set of barrier mechanisms that adapts to the following?
specific pathogens after repeated A. leukotrienes
exposure B. cytokines
D. the production of antibody molecules C. inflammation-eliciting mediators
against pathogens D. antimicrobial peptides
2 . Which of the following constantly sheds dead 6 . Which of the following chemical mediators is
cells along with any microbes that may be secreted onto the surface of the skin?
attached to those cells? A. cerumen
A. epidermis B. sebum
B. dermis C. gastric acid
C. hypodermis D. prostaglandin
D. mucous membrane
7 . Identify the complement activation pathway that
3 . Which of the following uses a particularly dense is triggered by the binding of an acute-phase
suite of tight junctions to prevent microbes from protein to a pathogen.
entering the underlying tissue? A. classical
A. the mucociliary escalator B. alternate
B. the epidermis C. lectin
C. the blood-brain barrier D. cathelicidin
D. the urethra
8 . Histamine, leukotrienes, prostaglandins, and
4 . Which of the following serve as chemical signals bradykinin are examples of which of the
between cells and stimulate a wide range of following?
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 709 ===
17 • Review Questions 695
A. chemical mediators primarily found in the destruction of the bacterial pathogens?
digestive system A. PRRs
B. chemical mediators that promote B. AMPs
inflammation C. PAMPs
C. antimicrobial peptides found on the skin D. PMNs
D. complement proteins that form MACs
14 . Which of the following best characterizes the
9 . White blood cells are also referred to as which of mode of pathogen recognition for opsonin-
the following? dependent phagocytosis?
A. platelets A. Opsonins produced by a pathogen attract
B. erythrocytes phagocytes through chemotaxis.
C. leukocytes B. A PAMP on the pathogen’s surface is
D. megakaryocytes recognized by a phagocyte’s toll-like
receptors.
10 . Hematopoiesis occurs in which of the following? C. A pathogen is first coated with a molecule
A. liver such as a complement protein, which
B. bone marrow allows it to be recognized by phagocytes.
C. kidneys D. A pathogen is coated with a molecule such
D. central nervous system as a complement protein that immediately
lyses the cell.
11 . Granulocytes are which type of cell?
A. lymphocyte 15 . Which refers to swelling as a result of
B. erythrocyte inflammation?
C. megakaryocyte A. erythema
D. leukocyte B. edema
C. granuloma
12 . PAMPs would be found on the surface of which D. vasodilation
of the following?
A. pathogen 16 . Which type of inflammation occurs at the site of
B. phagocyte an injury or infection?
C. skin cell A. acute
D. blood vessel wall B. chronic
C. endogenous
13 . ________ on phagocytes bind to PAMPs on D. exogenous
bacteria, which triggers the uptake and
Matching
17 . Match each cell type with its description.
___macrophage C. recognizes abnormal
___natural A. stains with basic dye cells, binds to them, and
killer cell methylene blue, has large releases perforin and
amounts of histamine in granzyme molecules, which
granules, and facilitates induce apoptosis
allergic responses and
inflammation ___eosinophil D. large agranular
phagocyte that resides in
___basophil B. stains with acidic dye tissues such as the brain
eosin, has histamine and and lungs
major basic protein in
granules, and facilitates
18 . Match each cellular defense with the infection it
responses to protozoa and
would most likely target.
helminths
=== PDF PAGE 710 ===
696 17 • Review Questions
___natural killer A. virus-infected cell
cell
___neutrophil B. tapeworm in the
intestines
___eosinophil C. bacteria in a skin lesion
Fill in the Blank
19 . The muscular contraction of the intestines that 27 . PMNs are another name for ________.
results in movement of material through the
28 . Kupffer cells residing in the liver are a type of
digestive tract is called ________.
________.
20 . ______ are the hair-like appendages of cells
29 . _____________ are similar to basophils, but
lining parts of the respiratory tract that sweep
reside in tissues rather than circulating in the
debris away from the lungs.
blood.
21 . Secretions that bathe and moisten the interior of
30 . ________, also known as diapedesis, refers to
the intestines are produced by _______ cells.
the exit from the bloodstream of neutrophils and
22 . ________ are antimicrobial peptides produced other circulating leukocytes.
by members of the normal microbiota.
31 . Toll-like receptors are examples of ________.
23 . ________ is the fluid portion of a blood sample
32 . A(n) ________ is a walled-off area of infected
that has been drawn in the presence of an
tissue that exhibits chronic inflammation.
anticoagulant compound.
33 . The ________ is the part of the body
24 . The process by which cells are drawn or
responsible for regulating body temperature.
attracted to an area by a microbe invader is
known as ________. 34 . Heat and redness, or ________, occur when the
small blood vessels in an inflamed area dilate
25 . Platelets are also called ________.
(open up), bringing more blood much closer to
26 . The cell in the bone marrow that gives rise to all the surface of the skin.
other blood cell types is the ________.
Short Answer
35 . Differentiate a physical barrier from a 39 . Explain the difference between plasma and the
mechanical removal mechanism and give an formed elements of the blood.
example of each.
40 . List three ways that a neutrophil can destroy an
36 . Identify some ways that pathogens can breach infectious bacterium.
the physical barriers of the innate immune
41 . Briefly summarize the events leading up to and
system.
including the process of transendothelial
37 . Differentiate the main activation methods of the migration.
classic, alternative, and lectin complement
42 . Differentiate exogenous and endogenous
cascades.
pyrogens, and provide an example of each.
38 . What are the four protective outcomes of
complement activation?
Critical Thinking
43 . Neutrophils can sometimes kill human cells toxic contents of their granules into the
along with pathogens when they release the surrounding tissue. Likewise, natural killer cells
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 711 ===
17 • Review Questions 697
target human cells for destruction. Explain why it Identify and characterize two to three therapies
is advantageous for the immune system to have that might be useful in stopping the dangerous
cells that can kill human cells as well as events and outcomes of septic shock once it has
pathogens. begun, given what you have learned about
inflammation and innate immunity in this
44 . Refer to Figure 17.13. In a blood smear taken
chapter.
from a healthy patient, which type of leukocyte
would you expect to observe in the highest 46 . In Lubeck, Germany, in 1930, a group of 251
numbers? infants was accidentally administered a tainted
vaccine for tuberculosis that contained live
45 . If a gram-negative bacterial infection reaches
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. This vaccine was
the bloodstream, large quantities of LPS can be
administered orally, directly exposing the infants
released into the blood, resulting in a syndrome
to the deadly bacterium. Many of these infants
called septic shock. Death due to septic shock is
contracted tuberculosis, and some died.
a real danger. The overwhelming immune and
However, 44 of the infants never contracted
inflammatory responses that occur with septic
tuberculosis. Based on your knowledge of the
shock can cause a perilous drop in blood
innate immune system, what innate defenses
pressure; intravascular blood clotting;
might have inhibited M. tuberculosis enough to
development of thrombi and emboli that block
prevent these infants from contracting the
blood vessels, leading to tissue death; failure of
disease?
multiple organs; and death of the patient.
=== PDF PAGE 712 ===
698 17 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org