=== CH1 (29 slides) ===
--- SLIDE 1 ---
Chapter 1: AN INVISIBLE WORLD
OpenStax. Figure 1.15 Assorted diatoms. Credit: modification of work by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
BIO203 -- National University
--- SLIDE 2 ---
Learning outcomes
Define microbiology
List the milestones in the history of microbiology
Explain the basis of classification of microbes
--- SLIDE 3 ---
Microbiology and microorganisms
It is the the science that studies microorganisms
What is a microorganism? An organism too small to see with the unaided eye.
Many sub-disciplines:
By application: medical, industrial, agricultural etc.
By type of microorganism studied: bacteriology, virology etc.
Credit: NIAID.  HIV-infected T cell. CC BY 2.0.
Credit: James Golden. Cyanobacteria. CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
--- SLIDE 4 ---
History: Fermented foods and beverages
Fermentation was known long time before knowing what caused it
Humans used high osmotic environment to preserve food (salted/pickled food, jams, jellies, preserves)
OpenStax. Figure 1.3. credit middle: modification of work by Janus Sandsgaard; credit right: modification of work by “MDreibelbis”/Flickr)
--- SLIDE 5 ---
History: transmission of diseases
Use of quarantine mentioned in the Bible
Ancient hygiene practices and infrastructure (Greeks and Romans)
Early concepts of immunity (Greeks)
Marcus Terentius: ”things we cannot see can cause disease”
OpenStax. Figure 1.5. (a) Hippocrates (b) Thucydides (c) Marcus Terentius Varro (credit c: modification of work by Alessandro Antonelli)
--- SLIDE 6 ---
Microscopes: first observations
In 1675 Anton van Leeuwenhoek described live microorganisms (animalcule)
Probably protists and bacteria
Credit:
Anne Ronan. Heritage Images. Animalcules.
Credit: Rob Koopman. Anthonie van Leeuwenhoek by Jan Verkolje oil painting. CC BY-SA 2.0.
--- SLIDE 7 ---
Edward Jenner and immunity
Observation:
Dairymaids who had mild cowpox infections were protected from smallpox
Hypothesis
Cowpox infection provides protection against smallpox
Experiment
Inoculated boy with cowpox fluid and later challenged with smallpox fluid
Result
Boy did not get smallpox
Credit: Oil painting by E.-E. Hillemacher, 1884. Edward Jenner vaccinating a boy.
--- SLIDE 8 ---
Golden Era of Microbiology: Pasteur
Louis Pasteur, French microbiologist
(1822–1895)
Pasteur demonstrated that microbes are responsible for fermentation
Pasteurization is the application of a high heat for a short time.
Pasteur developed several vaccines
OpenStax. Figure 1.6 Louis Pasteur.
--- SLIDE 9 ---
Golden Era of Microbiology: Koch
Robert Koch, German microbiologist
(1843–1910)
1876: Robert Koch proved that a bacterium causes anthrax
Germ Theory of disease
Provided the experimental steps, Koch’s postulates, to prove that a specific microbe causes a specific disease
Breakthroughs in microbial culture (although agar was Fanny Hesse’s idea- not recognized)
Credit: William Fechner. Robert Koch.
Credit: U.S. National Library of Medicine. Fanny Hesse, ca. 1883.
--- SLIDE 10 ---
Taxonomy
Naming and classifying organisms
Carolus Linnaeus’s system (1758) still used (with modifications)
Each organism has two names: the genus and specific epithet
Ex. Escherichia coli, or Staphylococcus aureus
OpenStax. Figure 1.8 Carolus Linnaeus.
--- SLIDE 11 ---
Chemotherapy
= Treating disease with chemicals
Paul Erhlich’s idea of the “magic bullet”
Selective toxicity:  only harmful for the pathogen not the host
Drug for syphilis (salvarsan)
Synthetic drugs
Sulfa drugs in 1930s
--- SLIDE 12 ---
Antibiotics
Antibiotics: produced by microorganisms, inhibit or kill other microbes
First antibiotic Penicillin (Fleming, 1928)
Petri dish with Staphylococcus was left open, the plate got contaminated with Penicillum mold
Clear zone around mold, no bacterial growth
Credit. Center for Research Collections University of Edinburgh. Penicillin Mold. CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
--- SLIDE 13 ---
Penicillin saved lives during WW2
Mass production just in time for WW2
Alexander Fleming was hailed for his discovery
Less known are the contributions of his colleague and spouse Mrs. Fleming (Dr. Voureka from Greece).
Credit: National Archives. Penicillin…Saves Soldiers Lives!
--- SLIDE 14 ---
Modern Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering
Biotechnology, the use of microbes to produce foods and chemicals, is centuries old.
Genetic engineering : bacteria and fungi can produce a variety of proteins including vaccines and enzymes.
Missing or defective genes in human cells can be replaced in gene therapy.
Genetically modified bacteria are used to protect crops from insects and from freezing.
CRISPR: gene editing based on normal bacterial processes, allow to make precise changes to DNA
--- SLIDE 15 ---
Microbes and disease
Human microbiome: microbes naturally inhabiting locations in the human body, contribute to health
Pathogens cause diseases
Epidemiology studies how diseases are transmitted
Pathogenic factors contribute to disease
Outbreaks
Foodborne diseases
Emerging diseases (Covid-19)
Recurring epidemics (flu)
Public health
--- SLIDE 16 ---
Environmental microbiology
Microbial ecology
Bacteria recycle carbon, nutrients, sulfur, and phosphorus that can be used by plants and animals.
Bioremediation: bacteria degrading pollutants
OpenStax, Figure 1.1. A veterinarian gets ready to clean a sea turtle covered in oil following the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010. Credit: modification of work by NOAA’s National Ocean Service.
--- SLIDE 17 ---
Phylogeny & Tree of Life
Linnaeus established the first classification of organisms based on visible characteristics
Phylogeny: evolutionary relationships
Currently: genetic, biochemical, and embryological considerations
1970s Carl Woese used ribosomal RNA sequences to establish the three-domain system: Bacteria, Archaea, Eukarya
OpenStax, Figure 1.10. This timeline shows how the shape of the tree of life has changed over the centuries.
--- SLIDE 18 ---
The three domain system
Three domain system, based on rRNA sequences
Bacteria
Archaea
Eukarya
Protists (Algae and Protozoa are here)
Fungi
Plants
Animals
OpenStax. Figure 1.11. Credit: modification of work by Eric Gaba.
--- SLIDE 19 ---
Binomial nomenclature
Genus & specific epithet
Italicized, genus capitalized, often only first letter used ex. E.coli
--- SLIDE 20 ---
Bacteria
Prokaryotes
Peptidoglycan cell walls
Divide by binary fission (no mitosis!)
Variety of energy sources: some use organic chemicals, others inorganic chemicals, or photosynthesis
OpenStax. Figure 1.13. Credit “Coccus”: modification of work by Janice Haney Carr, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit “Coccobacillus”: modification of work by Janice Carr, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit “Spirochete”: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
--- SLIDE 21 ---
Archaea
Prokaryotic
Cell wall different- no peptidoglycan
Live in extreme environments
Include
Methanogens (make methane, think landfills, deep mud, your gut)
Extreme halophiles (like salt)
Extreme thermophiles (like it hot)
OpenStax. Figure 1.14. The Morning Glory pool, a hot spring in Yellowstone National Park.
--- SLIDE 22 ---
Bergey’s Manuals
Bacteria and Archaea
Based on genetic, biochemical, and immunological characteristics.
Gram-staining is a differential staining based on cell wall properties
Bergey's Manual of Systematic Bacteriology: Five volumes published
Bergey's Manual of Determinative Bacteriology
http://www.bergeys.org/
--- SLIDE 23 ---
Protists: algae
Informal grouping of  eukaryotes that are not plants, animals, and fungi
Algae
Cellulose cell walls
Use photosynthesis for energy
Produce molecular oxygen and organic compounds
Not pathogenic
OpenStax. Figure 1.15 Assorted diatoms.
Credit: modification of work by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
--- SLIDE 24 ---
Protists: protozoa
Most complex one-celled organisms
Absorb or ingest organic chemicals
May be motile via pseudopods, cilia, or flagella
Many are human pathogens
OpenStax. Figure 1.16 Giardia lamblia. Credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
--- SLIDE 25 ---
Fungi
Chitin cell walls
Use organic chemicals for energy
Molds and mushrooms are multicellular.
Yeasts are unicellular (ex. Candida)
Molds can produce antibiotics
OpenStax. Figure 1.17 Candida albicans. Credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
OpenStax. Figure 1.18 Large colonies of microscopic fungi.
--- SLIDE 26 ---
Helminths
Multicellular animals
Parasitic flatworms and roundworms are called helminths.
Microscopic stages in life cycles.
OpenStax. Figure 1.19 (a) the beef tapeworm, Taenia saginata. (b) An adult guinea worm, Dracunculus medinensis. Credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
--- SLIDE 27 ---
Viruses
Acellular
Consist of DNA or RNA core
Core is surrounded by a protein coat
Coat may be enclosed in a lipid envelope
Viruses are replicated only when they are in a living host cell
OpenStax. Figure 1.20 (a) Members of the Coronavirus family. (b) Ebolavirus.(credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Thomas W. Geisbert)
--- SLIDE 28 ---
Prions
No nucleic acid- only proteins
Prusiner, Nobel prize 1998
The prion protein is an altered protein- makes a “healthy” molecule to change and become prion
Prions accumulate, form fibrils & cause disease
Degenerative CNS diseases
“Mad cow” disease
Credit: Astrojan. Amyloid polymer structure of prions. CC BY 4.0.
--- SLIDE 29 ---
End of chapter 1An invisible world
Download for free at https://openstax.org/details/books/microbiology.