=== PDF PAGE 881 ===
CHAPTER 22
Respiratory System Infections
FIGURE 22.1 Aerosols produced by sneezing, coughing, or even just speaking are an important mechanism for respiratory pathogen
transmission. Simple actions, like covering your mouth when coughing or sneezing, can reduce the spread of these microbes. (credit:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
22.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Respiratory Tract
22.2 Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract
22.3 Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract
22.4 Respiratory Mycoses
INTRODUCTION The respiratory tract is one of the main portals of entry into the human body for microbial
pathogens. On average, a human takes about 20,000 breaths each day. This roughly corresponds to 10,000 liters, or
10 cubic meters, of air. Suspended within this volume of air are millions of microbes of terrestrial, animal, and
human origin—including many potential pathogens. A few of these pathogens will cause relatively mild infections
like sore throats and colds. Others, however, are less benign. According to the World Health Organization,
respiratory tract infections such as tuberculosis, influenza, and pneumonia were responsible for more than 4 million
1
deaths worldwide in 2012.
At one time, it was thought that antimicrobial drugs and preventive vaccines might hold respiratory infections in
check in the developed world, but recent developments suggest otherwise. The rise of multiple-antibiotic resistance
in organisms like Mycobacterium tuberculosis has rendered many of our modern drugs ineffective. In addition, there
has been a recent resurgence in diseases like whooping cough and measles, once-common childhood illnesses
made rare by effective vaccines. Despite advances in medicine and public health programs, it is likely that
respiratory pathogens will remain formidable adversaries for the foreseeable future.
1 World Health Organization. “The Top Ten Causes of Death.” May 2014. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs310/en/
=== PDF PAGE 882 ===
868 22 • Respiratory System Infections
22.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Respiratory Tract
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the major anatomical features of the upper and lower respiratory tract
• Describe the normal microbiota of the upper and lower respiratory tracts
• Explain how microorganisms overcome defenses of upper and lower respiratory-tract membranes to
cause infection
• Explain how microbes and the respiratory system interact and modify each other in healthy individuals
and during an infection
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 1
John, a 65-year-old man with asthma and type 2 diabetes, works as a sales associate at a local home
improvement store. Recently, he began to feel quite ill and made an appointment with his family physician. At
the clinic, John reported experiencing headache, chest pain, coughing, and shortness of breath. Over the past
day, he had also experienced some nausea and diarrhea. A nurse took his temperature and found that he was
running a fever of 40 °C (104 °F).
John suggested that he must have a case of influenza (flu), and regretted that he had put off getting his flu
vaccine this year. After listening to John’s breathing through a stethoscope, the physician ordered a chest
radiography and collected blood, urine, and sputum samples.
• Based on this information, what factors may have contributed to John’s illness?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.
The primary function of the respiratory tract is to exchange gases (oxygen and carbon dioxide) for metabolism.
However, inhalation and exhalation (particularly when forceful) can also serve as a vehicle of transmission for
pathogens between individuals.
Anatomy of the Upper Respiratory System
The respiratory system can be conceptually divided into upper and lower regions at the point of the epiglottis, the
structure that seals off the lower respiratory system from the pharynx during swallowing (Figure 22.2). The upper
respiratory system is in direct contact with the external environment. The nares (or nostrils) are the external
openings of the nose that lead back into the nasal cavity, a large air-filled space behind the nares. These anatomical
sites constitute the primary opening and first section of the respiratory tract, respectively. The nasal cavity is lined
with hairs that trap large particles, like dust and pollen, and prevent their access to deeper tissues. The nasal cavity
is also lined with a mucous membrane and Bowman’s glands that produce mucus to help trap particles and
microorganisms for removal. The nasal cavity is connected to several other air-filled spaces. The sinuses, a set of
four, paired small cavities in the skull, communicate with the nasal cavity through a series of small openings. The
nasopharynx is part of the upper throat extending from the posterior nasal cavity. The nasopharynx carries air
inhaled through the nose. The middle ear is connected to the nasopharynx through the eustachian tube. The middle
ear is separated from the outer ear by the tympanic membrane, or ear drum. And finally, the lacrimal glands drain
to the nasal cavity through the nasolacrimal ducts (tear ducts). The open connections between these sites allow
microorganisms to move from the nasal cavity to the sinuses, middle ears (and back), and down into the lower
respiratory tract from the nasopharynx.
The oral cavity is a secondary opening for the respiratory tract. The oral and nasal cavities connect through the
fauces to the pharynx, or throat. The pharynx can be divided into three regions: the nasopharynx, the oropharynx,
and the laryngopharynx. Air inhaled through the mouth does not pass through the nasopharynx; it proceeds first
through the oropharynx and then through the laryngopharynx. The palatine tonsils, which consist of lymphoid
tissue, are located within the oropharynx. The laryngopharynx, the last portion of the pharynx, connects to the
larynx, which contains the vocal fold (Figure 22.2).
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 883 ===
22.1 • Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Respiratory Tract 869
FIGURE 22.2 (a) The ear is connected to the upper respiratory tract by the eustachian tube, which opens to the nasopharynx. (b) The
structures of the upper respiratory tract.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Identify the sequence of anatomical structures through which microbes would pass on their way from the
nares to the larynx.
• What two anatomical points do the eustachian tubes connect?
Anatomy of the Lower Respiratory System
The lower respiratory system begins below the epiglottis in the larynx or voice box (Figure 22.3). The trachea, or
windpipe, is a cartilaginous tube extending from the larynx that provides an unobstructed path for air to reach the
lungs. The trachea bifurcates into the left and right bronchi as it reaches the lungs. These paths branch repeatedly
to form smaller and more extensive networks of tubes, the bronchioles. The terminal bronchioles formed in this
tree-like network end in cul-de-sacs called the alveoli. These structures are surrounded by capillary networks and
are the site of gas exchange in the respiratory system. Human lungs contain on the order of 400,000,000 alveoli.
The outer surface of the lungs is protected with a double-layered pleural membrane. This structure protects the
lungs and provides lubrication to permit the lungs to move easily during respiration.
=== PDF PAGE 884 ===
870 22 • Respiratory System Infections
FIGURE 22.3 The structures of the lower respiratory tract are identified in this illustration. (credit: modification of work by National Cancer
Institute)
Defenses of the Respiratory System
The inner lining of the respiratory system consists of mucous membranes (Figure 22.4) and is protected by multiple
immune defenses. The goblet cells within the respiratory epithelium secrete a layer of sticky mucus. The viscosity
and acidity of this secretion inhibits microbial attachment to the underlying cells. In addition, the respiratory tract
contains ciliated epithelial cells. The beating cilia dislodge and propel the mucus, and any trapped microbes, upward
to the epiglottis, where they will be swallowed. Elimination of microbes in this manner is referred to as the
mucociliary escalator effect and is an important mechanism that prevents inhaled microorganisms from migrating
further into the lower respiratory tract.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 885 ===
22.1 • Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Respiratory Tract 871
FIGURE 22.4 This micrograph shows the structure of the mucous membrane of the respiratory tract. (credit: modification of micrograph
provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
The upper respiratory system is under constant surveillance by mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT),
including the adenoids and tonsils. Other mucosal defenses include secreted antibodies (IgA), lysozyme, surfactant,
and antimicrobial peptides called defensins. Meanwhile, the lower respiratory tract is protected by alveolar
macrophages. These phagocytes efficiently kill any microbes that manage to evade the other defenses. The
combined action of these factors renders the lower respiratory tract nearly devoid of colonized microbes.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Identify the sequence of anatomical structures through which microbes would pass on their way from the
larynx to the alveoli.
• Name some defenses of the respiratory system that protect against microbial infection.
Normal Microbiota of the Respiratory System
The upper respiratory tract contains an abundant and diverse microbiota. The nasal passages and sinuses are
primarily colonized by members of the Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Proteobacteria. The most common bacteria
identified include Staphylococcus epidermidis, viridans group streptococci (VGS), Corynebacterium spp.
(diphtheroids), Cutibacterium spp., and Haemophilus spp. The oropharynx includes many of the same isolates as
the nose and sinuses, with the addition of variable numbers of bacteria like species of Prevotella, Fusobacterium,
Moraxella, and Eikenella, as well as some Candida fungal isolates. In addition, many healthy humans
asymptomatically carry potential pathogens in the upper respiratory tract. As much as 20% of the population carry
2
Staphylococcus aureus in their nostrils. The pharynx, too, can be colonized with pathogenic strains of
Streptococcus, Haemophilus, and Neisseria.
The lower respiratory tract, by contrast, is scantily populated with microbes. Of the organisms identified in the lower
respiratory tract, species of Pseudomonas, Streptococcus, Prevotella, Fusobacterium, and Veillonella are the most
common. It is not clear at this time if these small populations of bacteria constitute a normal microbiota or if they
are transients.
Many members of the respiratory system’s normal microbiota are opportunistic pathogens. To proliferate and cause
2 J. Kluytmans et al. “Nasal Carriage of Staphylococcus aureus: Epidemiology, Underlying Mechanisms, and Associated Risks.” Clinical
Microbiology Reviews 10 no. 3 (1997):505–520.
=== PDF PAGE 886 ===
872 22 • Respiratory System Infections
host damage, they first must overcome the immune defenses of respiratory tissues. Many mucosal pathogens
produce virulence factors such as adhesins that mediate attachment to host epithelial cells, or polysaccharide
capsules that allow microbes to evade phagocytosis. The endotoxins of gram-negative bacteria can stimulate a
strong inflammatory response that damages respiratory cells. Other pathogens produce exotoxins, and still others
have the ability to survive within the host cells. Once an infection of the respiratory tract is established, it tends to
impair the mucociliary escalator, limiting the body’s ability to expel the invading microbes, thus making it easier for
pathogens to multiply and spread.
Vaccines have been developed for many of the most serious bacterial and viral pathogens. Several of the most
important respiratory pathogens and their vaccines, if available, are summarized in Table 22.1. Components of
these vaccines will be explained later in the chapter.
Some Important Respiratory Diseases and Vaccines
3
Disease Pathogen Available Vaccine(s)
Varicella (chickenpox) vaccine, herpes zoster (shingles)
Chickenpox/shingles Varicella-zoster virus
vaccine
Common cold Rhinovirus None
Corynebacterium
Diphtheria DtaP, Tdap, DT,Td, DTP
diphtheriae
Epiglottitis, otitis media Haemophilus influenzae Hib
Influenza Influenza viruses Inactivated, FluMist
Measles Measles virus MMR
Pertussis Bordetella pertussis DTaP, Tdap
Streptococcus Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13),
Pneumonia
pneumoniae pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23)
Rubella (German
Rubella virus MMR
measles)
Severe acute respiratory SARS-associated
None
syndrome (SARS) coronavirus (SARS-CoV)
Mycobacterium
Tuberculosis BCG
tuberculosis
TABLE 22.1
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What are some pathogenic bacteria that are part of the normal microbiota of the respiratory tract?
• What virulence factors are used by pathogens to overcome the immune protection of the respiratory tract?
3 Full names of vaccines listed in table: Haemophilus influenzae type B (Hib); Diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis (DtaP); tetanus,
diphtheria, and acellular pertussis (Tdap); diphtheria and tetanus (DT); tetanus and diphtheria (Td); diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus
(DTP); Bacillus Calmette-Guérin; Measles, mumps, rubella (MMR)
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 887 ===
22.2 • Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract 873
Signs and Symptoms of Respiratory Infection
Microbial diseases of the respiratory system typically result in an acute inflammatory response. These infections can
be grouped by the location affected and have names ending in “itis”, which literally means inflammation of. For
instance, rhinitis is an inflammation of the nasal cavities, often characteristic of the common cold. Rhinitis may also
be associated with hay fever allergies or other irritants. Inflammation of the sinuses is called sinusitis inflammation
of the ear is called otitis. Otitis media is an inflammation of the middle ear. A variety of microbes can cause
pharyngitis, commonly known as a sore throat. An inflammation of the larynx is called laryngitis. The resulting
inflammation may interfere with vocal cord function, causing voice loss. When tonsils are inflamed, it is called
tonsillitis. Chronic cases of tonsillitis may be treated surgically with tonsillectomy. More rarely, the epiglottis can be
infected, a condition called epiglottitis. In the lower respiratory system, the inflammation of the bronchial tubes
results in bronchitis. Most serious of all is pneumonia, in which the alveoli in the lungs are infected and become
inflamed. Pus and edema accumulate and fill the alveoli with fluids (called consolidations). This reduces the lungs’
ability to exchange gases and often results in a productive cough expelling phlegm and mucus. Cases of pneumonia
can range from mild to life-threatening, and remain an important cause of mortality in the very young and very old.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Describe the typical symptoms of rhinitis, sinusitis, pharyngitis, and laryngitis.
CASE IN POINT
Smoking-Associated Pneumonia
Camila is a 22-year-old student who has been a chronic smoker for 5 years. Recently, she developed a
persistent cough that has not responded to over-the-counter treatments. Her doctor ordered a chest radiograph
to investigate. The radiological results were consistent with pneumonia. In addition, Streptococcus pneumoniae
was isolated from Camila’s sputum.
Smokers are at a greater risk of developing pneumonia than the general population. Several components of
tobacco smoke have been demonstrated to impair the lungs’ immune defenses. These effects include disrupting
the function of the ciliated epithelial cells, inhibiting phagocytosis, and blocking the action of antimicrobial
peptides. Together, these lead to a dysfunction of the mucociliary escalator effect. The organisms trapped in the
mucus are therefore able to colonize the lungs and cause infections rather than being expelled or swallowed.
22.2 Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the most common bacteria that can cause infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract
• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases of the respiratory tract
The respiratory tract can be infected by a variety of bacteria, both gram positive and gram negative. Although the
diseases that they cause may range from mild to severe, in most cases, the microbes remain localized within the
respiratory system. Fortunately, most of these infections also respond well to antibiotic therapy.
Streptococcal Infections
A common upper respiratory infection, streptococcal pharyngitis (strep throat) is caused by Streptococcus
pyogenes. This gram-positive bacterium appears as chains of cocci, as seen in Figure 22.5. Rebecca Lancefield
serologically classified streptococci in the 1930s using carbohydrate antigens from the bacterial cell walls. S.
pyogenes is the sole member of the Lancefield group A streptococci and is often referred to as GAS, or group A
strep.
=== PDF PAGE 888 ===
874 22 • Respiratory System Infections
FIGURE 22.5 This scanning electron micrograph of Streptococcus pyogenes shows the characteristic cellular phenotype resembling chains
of cocci. (credit: modification of work by U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention - Medical Illustrator)
Similar to streptococcal infections of the skin, the mucosal membranes of the pharynx are damaged by the release
of a variety of exoenzymes and exotoxins by this extracellular pathogen. Many strains of S. pyogenes can degrade
connective tissues by using hyaluronidase, collagenase and streptokinase. Streptokinase activates plasmin, which
leads to degradation of fibrin and, in turn, dissolution of blood clots, which assists in the spread of the pathogen.
Released toxins include streptolysins that can destroy red and white blood cells. The classic signs of streptococcal
pharyngitis are a fever higher than 38 °C (100.4 °F); intense pharyngeal pain; erythema associated with pharyngeal
inflammation; and swollen, dark-red palatine tonsils, often dotted with patches of pus; and petechiae
(microcapillary hemorrhages) on the soft or hard palate (roof of the mouth) (Figure 22.6). The submandibular lymph
nodes beneath the angle of the jaw are also often swollen during strep throat.
Some strains of group A streptococci produce erythrogenic toxin. This exotoxin is encoded by a temperate
bacteriophage (bacterial virus) and is an example of phage conversion (see The Viral Life Cycle). The toxin attacks
the plasma membranes of capillary endothelial cells and leads to scarlet fever (or scarlatina), a disseminated fine
red rash on the skin, and strawberry tongue, a red rash on the tongue (Figure 22.6). Severe cases may even lead to
streptococcal toxic shock syndrome (STSS), which results from massive superantigen production that leads to septic
shock and death.
S. pyogenes can be easily spread by direct contact or droplet transmission through coughing and sneezing. The
disease can be diagnosed quickly using a rapid enzyme immunoassay for the group A antigen. However, due to a
4
significant rate of false-negative results (up to 30% ), culture identification is still the gold standard to confirm
pharyngitis due to S. pyogenes. S. pyogenes can be identified as a catalase-negative, beta hemolytic bacterium that
is susceptible to 0.04 units of bacitracin. Antibiotic resistance is limited for this bacterium, so most β-lactams
remain effective; oral amoxicillin and intramuscular penicillin G are those most commonly prescribed.
4 WL Lean et al. “Rapid Diagnostic Tests for Group A Streptococcal Pharyngitis: A Meta-Analysis.” Pediatrics 134, no. 4 (2014):771–781.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 889 ===
22.2 • Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract 875
FIGURE 22.6 Streptococcal infections of the respiratory tract may cause localized pharyngitis or systemic signs and symptoms. (a) The
characteristic appearance of strep throat: bright red arches of inflammation with the presence of dark-red spots (petechiae). (b) Scarlet
fever presents as a rash on the skin. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of
work by Alicia Williams)
Sequelae of S. pyogenes Infections
One reason strep throat infections are aggressively treated with antibiotics is because they can lead to serious
sequelae, later clinical consequences of a primary infection. It is estimated that 1%–3% of untreated S. pyogenes
infections can be followed by nonsuppurative (without the production of pus) sequelae that develop 1–3 weeks
after the acute infection has resolved. Two such sequelae are acute rheumatic fever and acute
glomerulonephritis.
Acute rheumatic fever can follow pharyngitis caused by specific rheumatogenic strains of S. pyogenes (strains 1, 3,
5, 6, and 18). Although the exact mechanism responsible for this sequela remains unclear, molecular mimicry
between the M protein of rheumatogenic strains of S. pyogenes and heart tissue is thought to initiate the
autoimmune attack. The most serious and lethal clinical manifestation of rheumatic fever is damage to and
inflammation of the heart (carditis). Acute glomerulonephritis also results from an immune response to
streptococcal antigens following pharyngitis and cutaneous infections. Acute glomerulonephritis develops within
6–10 days after pharyngitis, but can take up to 21 days after a cutaneous infection. Similar to acute rheumatic fever,
there are strong associations between specific nephritogenic strains of S. pyogenes and acute glomerulonephritis,
and evidence suggests a role for antigen mimicry and autoimmunity. However, the primary mechanism of acute
glomerulonephritis appears to be the formation of immune complexes between S. pyogenes antigens and
antibodies, and their deposition between endothelial cells of the glomeruli of kidney. Inflammatory response
against the immune complexes leads to damage and inflammation of the glomeruli (glomerulonephritis).
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What are the symptoms of strep throat?
• What is erythrogenic toxin and what effect does it have?
• What are the causes of rheumatic fever and acute glomerulonephritis?
Acute Otitis Media
An infection of the middle ear is called acute otitis media (AOM), but often it is simply referred to as an earache.
The condition is most common between ages 3 months and 3 years. In the United States, AOM is the second-
leading cause of visits to pediatricians by children younger than age 5 years, and it is the leading indication for
5
antibiotic prescription.
AOM is characterized by the formation and accumulation of pus in the middle ear. Unable to drain, the pus builds up,
resulting in moderate to severe bulging of the tympanic membrane and otalgia (ear pain). Inflammation resulting
5 G. Worrall. “Acute Otitis Media.” Canadian Family Physician 53 no. 12 (2007):2147–2148.
=== PDF PAGE 890 ===
876 22 • Respiratory System Infections
from the infection leads to swelling of the eustachian tubes, and may also lead to fever, nausea, vomiting, and
diarrhea, particularly in infants. Infants and toddlers who cannot yet speak may exhibit nonverbal signs suggesting
AOM, such as holding, tugging, or rubbing of the ear, as well as uncharacteristic crying or distress in response to the
pain.
AOM can be caused by a variety of bacteria. Among neonates, S. pneumoniae is the most common cause of AOM,
but Escherichia coli, Enterococcus spp., and group B Streptococcus species can also be involved. In older infants
and children younger than 14 years old, the most common bacterial causes are S. pneumoniae, Haemophilus
influenzae, or Moraxella catarrhalis. Among S. pneumoniae infections, encapsulated strains are frequent causes of
AOM. By contrast, the strains of H. influenzae and M. cattarhalis that are responsible for AOM do not possess a
capsule. Rather than direct tissue damage by these pathogens, bacterial components such as lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) in gram-negative pathogens induce an inflammatory response that causes swelling, pus, and tissue damage
within the middle ear (Figure 22.7).
Any blockage of the eustachian tubes, with or without infection, can cause fluid to become trapped and accumulate
in the middle ear. This is referred to as otitis media with effusion (OME). The accumulated fluid offers an excellent
reservoir for microbial growth and, consequently, secondary bacterial infections often ensue. This can lead to
recurring and chronic earaches, which are especially common in young children. The higher incidence in children
can be attributed to many factors. Children have more upper respiratory infections, in general, and their eustachian
tubes are also shorter and drain at a shallower angle. Young children also tend to spend more time lying down than
adults, which facilitates drainage from the nasopharynx through the eustachian tube and into the middle ear. Bottle
feeding while lying down enhances this risk because the sucking action on the bottle causes negative pressure to
build up within the eustachian tube, promoting the movement of fluid and bacteria from the nasopharynx.
Diagnosis is typically made based on clinical signs and symptoms, without laboratory testing to determine the
specific causative agent. Antibiotics are frequently prescribed for the treatment of AOM. High-dose amoxicillin is the
first-line drug, but with increasing resistance concerns, macrolides and cephalosporins may also be used. The
pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) contains serotypes that are important causes of AOM, and vaccination
has been shown to decrease the incidence of AOM. Vaccination against influenza has also been shown to decrease
the risk for AOM, likely because viral infections like influenza predispose patients to secondary infections with S.
pneumoniae. Although there is a conjugate vaccine available for the invasive serotype B of H. influenzae, this
vaccine does not impact the incidence of H. influenzae AOM. Because unencapsulated strains of H. influenzae and
M. catarrhalis are involved in AOM, vaccines against bacterial cellular factors other than capsules will need to be
developed.
FIGURE 22.7 (a) A healthy tympanic membrane; the middle ear bones can be seen behind the membrane. (b) An ear with chronic
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 891 ===
22.2 • Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract 877
inflammation that has resulted in a torn membrane, erosion of the inner ear bones, and mucus buildup. (credit a: modification of work by
“DrER.tv”/YouTube; credit b: modification of work by Li Mg, Hotez PJ, Vrabec JT, Donovan DT)
Bacterial Rhinosinusitis
The microbial community of the nasopharynx is extremely diverse and harbors many opportunistic pathogens, so it
is perhaps not surprising that infections leading to rhinitis and sinusitis have many possible causes. These
conditions often occur as secondary infections after a viral infection, which effectively compromises the immune
defenses and allows the opportunistic bacteria to establish themselves. Bacterial sinusitis involves infection and
inflammation within the paranasal sinuses. Because bacterial sinusitis rarely occurs without rhinitis, the preferred
term is rhinosinusitis. The most common causes of bacterial rhinosinusitis are similar to those for AOM, including S.
pneumoniae, H. influenzae, and M. catarrhalis.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What are the usual causative agents of acute otitis media?
• What factors facilitate acute otitis media with effusion in young children?
• What factor often triggers bacterial rhinosinusitis?
Diphtheria
The causative agent of diphtheria, Corynebacterium diphtheriae, is a club-shaped, gram-positive rod that belongs
to the phylum Actinobacteria. Diphtheroids are common members of the normal nasopharyngeal microbiota.
However, some strains of C. diphtheriae become pathogenic because of the presence of a temperate bacteriophage-
encoded protein—the diphtheria toxin. Diphtheria is typically a respiratory infection of the oropharynx but can also
cause impetigo-like lesions on the skin. Although the disease can affect people of all ages, it tends to be most
severe in those younger than 5 years or older than 40 years. Like strep throat, diphtheria is commonly transmitted in
the droplets and aerosols produced by coughing. After colonizing the throat, the bacterium remains in the oral cavity
and begins producing the diphtheria toxin. This protein is an A-B toxin that blocks host-cell protein synthesis by
inactivating elongation factor (EF)-2 (see Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens). The toxin’s action
leads to the death of the host cells and an inflammatory response. An accumulation of grayish exudate consisting of
dead host cells, pus, red blood cells, fibrin, and infectious bacteria results in the formation of a pseudomembrane.
The pseudomembrane can cover mucous membranes of the nasal cavity, tonsils, pharynx, and larynx (Figure 22.8).
This is a classic sign of diphtheria. As the disease progresses, the pseudomembrane can enlarge to obstruct the
fauces of the pharynx or trachea and can lead to suffocation and death. Sometimes, intubation, the placement of a
breathing tube in the trachea, is required in advanced infections. If the diphtheria toxin spreads throughout the
body, it can damage other tissues as well. This can include myocarditis (heart damage) and nerve damage that may
impair breathing.
=== PDF PAGE 892 ===
878 22 • Respiratory System Infections
FIGURE 22.8 The pseudomembrane in a patient with diphtheria presents as a leathery gray patch consisting of dead cells, pus, fibrin, red
blood cells, and infectious microbes. (credit: modification of work by Putnong N, Agustin G, Pasubillo M, Miyagi K, Dimaano EM)
The presumptive diagnosis of diphtheria is primarily based on the clinical symptoms (i.e., the pseudomembrane)
and vaccination history, and is typically confirmed by identifying bacterial cultures obtained from throat swabs. The
diphtheria toxin itself can be directly detected in vitro using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based, direct
detection systems for the diphtheria tox gene, and immunological techniques like radial immunodiffusion or Elek’s
immunodiffusion test.
Broad-spectrum antibiotics like penicillin and erythromycin tend to effectively control C. diphtheriae infections.
Regrettably, they have no effect against preformed toxins. If toxin production has already occurred in the patient,
antitoxins (preformed antibodies against the toxin) are administered. Although this is effective in neutralizing the
toxin, the antitoxins may lead to serum sickness because they are produced in horses (see Hypersensitivities).
Widespread vaccination efforts have reduced the occurrence of diphtheria worldwide. There are currently four
combination toxoid vaccines available that provide protection against diphtheria and other diseases: DTaP, Tdap, DT,
and Td. In all cases, the letters “d,” “t,” and “p” stand for diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis, respectively; the “a”
stands for acellular. If capitalized, the letters indicate a full-strength dose; lowercase letters indicate reduced
dosages. According to current recommendations, children should receive five doses of the DTaP vaccine in their
youth and a Td booster every 10 years. Children with adverse reactions to the pertussis vaccine may be given the DT
vaccine in place of the DTaP.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What effect does diphtheria toxin have?
• What is the pseudomembrane composed of?
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 893 ===
22.2 • Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract 879
Bacterial Pneumonia
Pneumonia is a general term for infections of the lungs that lead to inflammation and accumulation of fluids and
white blood cells in the alveoli. Pneumonia can be caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi, and other organisms, although
the vast majority of pneumonias are bacterial in origin. Bacterial pneumonia is a prevalent, potentially serious
6
infection; it caused more 50,000 deaths in the United States in 2014. As the alveoli fill with fluids and white blood
cells (consolidation), air exchange becomes impaired and patients experience respiratory distress (Figure 22.9). In
addition, pneumonia can lead to pleurisy, an infection of the pleural membrane surrounding the lungs, which can
make breathing very painful. Although many different bacteria can cause pneumonia under the right circumstances,
three bacterial species cause most clinical cases: Streptococcus pneumoniae, H. influenzae, and Mycoplasma
pneumoniae. In addition to these, we will also examine some of the less common causes of pneumonia.
FIGURE 22.9 A chest radiograph of a patient with pneumonia shows the consolidations (lesions) present as opaque patches. (credit:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Pneumococcal Pneumonia
The most common cause of community-acquired bacterial pneumonia is Streptococcus pneumoniae. This gram-
positive, alpha hemolytic streptococcus is commonly found as part of the normal microbiota of the human
respiratory tract. The cells tend to be somewhat lancet-shaped and typically appear as pairs (Figure 22.10). The
pneumococci initially colonize the bronchioles of the lungs. Eventually, the infection spreads to the alveoli, where
the microbe’s polysaccharide capsule interferes with phagocytic clearance. Other virulence factors include
autolysins like Lyt A, which degrade the microbial cell wall, resulting in cell lysis and the release of cytoplasmic
virulence factors. One of these factors, pneumolysin O, is important in disease progression; this pore-forming
protein damages host cells, promotes bacterial adherence, and enhances pro-inflammatory cytokine production.
The resulting inflammatory response causes the alveoli to fill with exudate rich in neutrophils and red blood cells. As
a consequence, infected individuals develop a productive cough with bloody sputum.
6 KD Kochanek et al. “Deaths: Final Data for 2014.” National Vital Statistics Reports 65 no 4 (2016).
=== PDF PAGE 894 ===
880 22 • Respiratory System Infections
FIGURE 22.10 (a) This micrograph of Streptococcus pneumoniae grown from a blood culture shows the characteristic lancet-shaped
diplococcal morphology. (b) A colorized scanning electron micrograph of S. pneumoniae. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by Janice Carr, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Pneumococci can be presumptively identified by their distinctive gram-positive, lancet-shaped cell morphology and
diplococcal arrangement. In blood agar cultures, the organism demonstrates alpha hemolytic colonies that are
autolytic after 24 to 48 hours. In addition, S. pneumoniae is extremely sensitive to optochin and colonies are rapidly
destroyed by the addition of 10% solution of sodium deoxycholate. All clinical pneumococcal isolates are serotyped
using the quellung reaction with typing antisera produced by the CDC. Positive quellung reactions are considered
definitive identification of pneumococci.
Antibiotics remain the mainstay treatment for pneumococci. β-Lactams like penicillin are the first-line drugs, but
resistance to β-lactams is a growing problem. When β-lactam resistance is a concern, macrolides and
fluoroquinolones may be prescribed. However, S. pneumoniae resistance to macrolides and fluoroquinolones is
increasing as well, limiting the therapeutic options for some infections. There are currently two pneumococcal
vaccines available: pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) and pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23).
These are generally given to the most vulnerable populations of individuals: children younger than 2 years and
adults older than 65 years.
Haemophilus Pneumonia
Encapsulated strains of Haemophilus influenzae are known for causing meningitis, but nonencapsulated strains are
important causes of pneumonia. This small, gram-negative coccobacillus is found in the pharynx of the majority of
healthy children; however, Haemophilus pneumonia is primarily seen in the elderly. Like other pathogens that cause
pneumonia, H. influenzae is spread by droplets and aerosols produced by coughing. A fastidious organism, H.
influenzae will only grow on media with available factor X (hemin) and factor V (NAD), like chocolate agar (Figure
22.11). Serotyping must be performed to confirm identity of H. influenzae isolates.
Infections of the alveoli by H. influenzae result in inflammation and accumulation of fluids. Increasing resistance to
β-lactams, macrolides, and tetracyclines presents challenges for the treatment of Haemophilus pneumonia.
Resistance to the fluoroquinolones is rare among isolates of H. influenzae but has been observed. As discussed for
AOM, a vaccine directed against nonencapsulated H. influenzae, if developed, would provide protection against
pneumonia caused by this pathogen.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 895 ===
22.2 • Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract 881
FIGURE 22.11 Culture of Haemophilus influenzae on a chocolate agar plate. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention)
CASE IN POINT
Why Me?
Tracy is a 6-year old who developed a serious cough that would not seem to go away. After 2 weeks, her parents
became concerned and took her to the pediatrician, who suspected a case of bacterial pneumonia. Tests
confirmed that the cause was Haemophilus influenzae. Fortunately, Tracy responded well to antibiotic treatment
and eventually made a full recovery.
Because there had been several other cases of bacterial pneumonia at Tracy’s elementary school, local health
officials urged parents to have their children screened. Of the children who were screened, it was discovered
that greater than 50% carried H. influenzae in their nasal cavities, yet all but two of them were asymptomatic.
Why is it that some individuals become seriously ill from bacterial infections that seem to have little or no effect
on others? The pathogenicity of an organism—its ability to cause host damage—is not solely a property of the
microorganism. Rather, it is the product of a complex relationship between the microbe’s virulence factors and
the immune defenses of the individual. Preexisting conditions and environmental factors such as exposure to
secondhand smoke can make some individuals more susceptible to infection by producing conditions favorable
to microbial growth or compromising the immune system. In addition, individuals may have genetically
determined immune factors that protect them—or not—from particular strains of pathogens. The interactions
between these host factors and the pathogenicity factors produced by the microorganism ultimately determine
the outcome of the infection. A clearer understanding of these interactions may allow for better identification of
at-risk individuals and prophylactic interventions in the future.
Mycoplasma Pneumonia (Walking Pneumonia)
Primary atypical pneumonia is caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae. This bacterium is not part of the respiratory
tract’s normal microbiota and can cause epidemic disease outbreaks. Also known as walking pneumonia,
mycoplasma pneumonia infections are common in crowded environments like college campuses and military
bases. It is spread by aerosols formed when coughing or sneezing. The disease is often mild, with a low fever and
persistent cough. These bacteria, which do not have cell walls, use a specialized attachment organelle to bind to
ciliated cells. In the process, epithelial cells are damaged and the proper function of the cilia is hindered (Figure
22.12).
Mycoplasma grow very slowly when cultured. Therefore, penicillin and thallium acetate are added to agar to prevent
the overgrowth by faster-growing potential contaminants. Since M. pneumoniae does not have a cell wall, it is
resistant to these substances. Without a cell wall, the microbial cells appear pleomorphic. M. pneumoniae infections
tend to be self-limiting but may also respond well to macrolide antibiotic therapy. β-lactams, which target cell wall
=== PDF PAGE 896 ===
882 22 • Respiratory System Infections
synthesis, are not indicated for treatment of infections with this pathogen.
FIGURE 22.12 The micrograph shows Mycoplasma pneumoniae using their specialized receptors to attach to epithelial cells in the trachea
of an infected hamster. (credit: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)
Chlamydial Pneumonias and Psittacosis
Chlamydial pneumonia can be caused by three different species of bacteria: Chlamydia, Chlamydia psittaci, and
Chlamydia trachomatis. All three are obligate intracellular pathogens and cause mild to severe pneumonia and
bronchitis. Of the three, Chlamydia pneumoniae is the most common and is transmitted via respiratory droplets or
aerosols. C. psittaci causes psittacosis, a zoonotic disease that primarily affects domesticated birds such as
parakeets, turkeys, and ducks, but can be transmitted from birds to humans. Psittacosis is a relatively rare infection
and is typically found in people who work with birds. Chlamydia trachomatis, the causative agent of the sexually
transmitted disease chlamydia, can cause pneumonia in infants when the infection is passed from a person giving
birth to a baby.
Diagnosis of chlamydia by culturing tends to be difficult and slow. Because they are intracellular pathogens, they
require multiple passages through tissue culture. Recently, a variety of PCR- and serologically based tests have been
developed to enable easier identification of these pathogens. Tetracycline and macrolide antibiotics are typically
prescribed for treatment.
Health Care-Associated Pneumonia
A variety of opportunistic bacteria that do not typically cause respiratory disease in healthy individuals are common
causes of health care-associated pneumonia. These include Klebsiella pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, and
proteobacteria such as species of Escherichia, Proteus, and Serratia. Patients at risk include the elderly, those who
have other preexisting lung conditions, and those who are immunocompromised. In addition, patients receiving
supportive therapies such as intubation, antibiotics, and immunomodulatory drugs may also be at risk because
these interventions disrupt the mucociliary escalator and other pulmonary defenses. Invasive medical devices such
as catheters, medical implants, and ventilators can also introduce opportunistic pneumonia-causing pathogens into
7
the body.
Pneumonia caused by K. pneumoniae is characterized by lung necrosis and “currant jelly sputum,” so named
because it consists of clumps of blood, mucus, and debris from the thick polysaccharide capsule produced by the
bacterium. K. pneumoniae is often multidrug resistant. Aminoglycoside and cephalosporin are often prescribed but
are not always effective. Klebsiella pneumonia is frequently fatal even when treated.
7 SM Koenig et al. “Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia: Diagnosis, Treatment, and Prevention.” Clinical Microbiology Reviews 19 no. 4
(2006):637–657.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 897 ===
22.2 • Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract 883
Pseudomonas Pneumonia
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is another opportunistic pathogen that can cause serious cases of bacterial pneumonia in
patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) and hospitalized patients assisted with artificial ventilators. This bacterium is
extremely antibiotic resistant and can produce a variety of exotoxins. Ventilator-associated pneumonia with P.
aeruginosa is caused by contaminated equipment that causes the pathogen to be aspirated into the lungs. In
patients with CF, a genetic defect in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane receptor (CFTR) leads to the accumulation of
excess dried mucus in the lungs. This decreases the effectiveness of the defensins and inhibits the mucociliary
escalator. P. aeruginosa is known to infect more than half of all patients with CF. It adapts to the conditions in the
patient’s lungs and begins to produce alginate, a viscous exopolysaccharide that inhibits the mucociliary escalator.
Lung damage from the chronic inflammatory response that ensues is the leading cause of mortality in patients with
8
CF.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What three pathogens are responsible for the most prevalent types of bacterial pneumonia?
• Which cause of pneumonia is most likely to affect young people?
• In what contexts does Pseudomonas aeruginosa cause pneumonia?
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 2
John’s chest radiograph revealed an extensive consolidation in the right lung, and his sputum cultures revealed
the presence of a gram-negative rod. His physician prescribed a course of the antibiotic clarithromycin. He also
ordered the rapid influenza diagnostic tests (RIDTs) for type A and B influenza to rule out a possible underlying
viral infection. Despite antibiotic therapy, John’s condition continued to deteriorate, so he was admitted to the
hospital.
• What are some possible causes of pneumonia that would not have responded to the prescribed antibiotic?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis (TB) is one of the deadliest infectious diseases in human history. Although tuberculosis infection rates
in the United States are extremely low, the CDC estimates that about one-third of the world’s population is infected
with Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the causal organism of TB, with 9.6 million new TB cases and 1.5 million deaths
9
worldwide in 2014.
M. tuberculosis is an acid-fast, high G + C, gram-positive, nonspore-forming rod. Its cell wall is rich in waxy mycolic
acids, which make the cells impervious to polar molecules. It also causes these organisms to grow slowly. M.
tuberculosis causes a chronic granulomatous disease that can infect any area of the body, although it is typically
associated with the lungs. M. tuberculosis is spread by inhalation of respiratory droplets or aerosols from an
10
infected person. The infectious dose of M. tuberculosis is only 10 cells.
After inhalation, the bacteria enter the alveoli (Figure 22.13). The cells are phagocytized by macrophages but can
survive and multiply within these phagocytes because of the protection by the waxy mycolic acid in their cell walls.
If not eliminated by macrophages, the infection can progress, causing an inflammatory response and an
accumulation of neutrophils and macrophages in the area. Several weeks or months may pass before an
immunological response is mounted by T cells and B cells. Eventually, the lesions in the alveoli become walled off,
forming small round lesions called tubercles. Bacteria continue to be released into the center of the tubercles and
8 R. Sordé et al. “Management of Refractory Pseudomonas aeruginosa Infection in Cystic Fibrosis.” Infection and Drug Resistance 4
(2011):31–41.
9 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Tuberculosis (TB). Data and Statistics.” http://www.cdc.gov/tb/statistics/default.htm
10 D. Saini et al. “Ultra-Low Dose of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Aerosol Creates Partial Infection in Mice.” Tuberculosis 92 no. 2
(2012):160–165.
=== PDF PAGE 898 ===
884 22 • Respiratory System Infections
the chronic immune response results in tissue damage and induction of apoptosis (programmed host-cell death) in
a process called liquefaction. This creates a caseous center, or air pocket, where the aerobic M. tuberculosis can
grow and multiply. Tubercles may eventually rupture and bacterial cells can invade pulmonary capillaries; from
there, bacteria can spread through the bloodstream to other organs, a condition known as miliary tuberculosis. The
rupture of tubercles also facilitates transmission of the bacteria to other individuals via droplet aerosols that exit the
body in coughs. Because these droplets can be very small and stay aloft for a long time, special precautions are
necessary when caring for patients with TB, such as the use of face masks and negative-pressure ventilation and
filtering systems.
Eventually, most lesions heal to form calcified Ghon complexes. These structures are visible on chest radiographs
and are a useful diagnostic feature. But even after the disease has apparently ended, viable bacteria remain
sequestered in these locations. Release of these organisms at a later time can produce reactivation tuberculosis
(or secondary TB). This is mainly observed in people with alcoholism, the elderly, or in otherwise
immunocompromised individuals (Figure 22.13).
FIGURE 22.13 In the infectious cycle of tuberculosis, the immune response of most infected individuals (approximately 90%) results in the
11
formation of tubercles in which the infection is walled off. The remainder will suffer progressive primary tuberculosis. The sequestered
bacteria may be reactivated to form secondary tuberculosis in immunocompromised patients at a later time. (credit: modification of work
by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
11 G. Kaplan et al. “Mycobacterium tuberculosis Growth at the Cavity Surface: A Microenvironment with Failed Immunity.” Infection and
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 899 ===
22.2 • Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract 885
Because TB is a chronic disease, chemotherapeutic treatments often continue for months or years. Multidrug
resistant (MDR-TB) and extensively drug-resistant (XDR-TB) strains of M. tuberculosis are a growing clinical
concern. These strains can arise due to misuse or mismanagement of antibiotic therapies. Therefore, it is imperative
that proper multidrug protocols are used to treat these infections. Common antibiotics included in these mixtures
are isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide.
A TB vaccine is available that is based on the so-called bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) strain of M. bovis commonly
found in cattle. In the United States, the BCG vaccine is only given to health-care workers and members of the
military who are at risk of exposure to active cases of TB. It is used more broadly worldwide. Many individuals born
in other countries have been vaccinated with BCG strain. BCG is used in many countries with a high prevalence of
TB, to prevent childhood tuberculous meningitis and miliary disease.
The Mantoux tuberculin skin test (Figure 22.14) is regularly used in the United States to screen for potential TB
exposure (see Hypersensitivities). However, prior vaccinations with the BCG vaccine can cause false-positive
results. Chest radiographs to detect Ghon complex formation are required, therefore, to confirm exposure.
FIGURE 22.14 (a) The Mantoux skin test for tuberculosis involves injecting the subject with tuberculin protein derivative. The injection
should initially produce a raised wheal. (b) The test should be read in 48–72 hours. A positive result is indicated by redness, swelling, or
hardness; the size of the responding region is measured to determine the final result. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention)
LINK TO LEARNING
This short animation (https://openstax.org/l/22mycotublegpnean) describes the mechanisms of infection
associated with Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What characteristic of Mycobacterium tuberculosis allows it to evade the immune response?
• What happens to cause miliary tuberculosis?
• Explain the limitations of the Mantoux tuberculin skin test.
Pertussis (Whooping Cough)
The causative agent of pertussis, commonly called whooping cough, is Bordetella pertussis, a gram-negative
coccobacillus. The disease is characterized by mucus accumulation in the lungs that leads to a long period of severe
coughing. Sometimes, following a bout of coughing, a sound resembling a “whoop” is produced as air is inhaled
through the inflamed and restricted airway—hence the name whooping cough. Although adults can be infected, the
symptoms of this disease are most pronounced in infants and children. Pertussis is highly communicable through
droplet transmission, so the uncontrollable coughing produced is an efficient means of transmitting the disease in a
susceptible population.
Following inhalation, B. pertussis specifically attaches to epithelial cells using an adhesin, filamentous
Immunity 71 no.12 (2003):7099–7108.
=== PDF PAGE 900 ===
886 22 • Respiratory System Infections
hemagglutinin. The bacteria then grow at the site of infection and cause disease symptoms through the production
of exotoxins. One of the main virulence factors of this organism is an A-B exotoxin called the pertussis toxin (PT).
When PT enters the host cells, it increases the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels and disrupts cellular
signaling. PT is known to enhance inflammatory responses involving histamine and serotonin. In addition to PT, B.
pertussis produces a tracheal cytotoxin that damages ciliated epithelial cells and results in accumulation of mucus
in the lungs. The mucus can support the colonization and growth of other microbes and, as a consequence,
secondary infections are common. Together, the effects of these factors produce the cough that characterizes this
infection.
A pertussis infection can be divided into three distinct stages. The initial infection, termed the catarrhal stage, is
relatively mild and unremarkable. The signs and symptoms may include nasal congestion, a runny nose, sneezing,
and a low-grade fever. This, however, is the stage in which B. pertussis is most infectious. In the paroxysmal stage,
mucus accumulation leads to uncontrollable coughing spasms that can last for several minutes and frequently
induce vomiting. The paroxysmal stage can last for several weeks. A long convalescence stage follows the
paroxysmal stage, during which time patients experience a chronic cough that can last for up to several months. In
fact, the disease is sometimes called the 100-day cough.
In infants, coughing can be forceful enough to cause fractures to the ribs, and prolonged infections can lead to
12 13
death. The CDC reported 20 pertussis-related deaths in 2012, but that number had declined to five by 2015.
During the first 2 weeks of infection, laboratory diagnosis is best performed by culturing the organism directly from a
nasopharyngeal (NP) specimen collected from the posterior nasopharynx. The NP specimen is streaked onto
Bordet-Gengou medium. The specimens must be transported to the laboratory as quickly as possible, even if
transport media are used. Transport times of longer than 24 hours reduce the viability of B. pertussis significantly.
Within the first month of infection, B. pertussis can be diagnosed using PCR techniques. During the later stages of
infection, pertussis-specific antibodies can be immunologically detected using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA).
Pertussis is generally a self-limiting disease. Antibiotic therapy with erythromycin or tetracycline is only effective at
the very earliest stages of disease. Antibiotics given later in the infection, and prophylactically to uninfected
individuals, reduce the rate of transmission. Active vaccination is a better approach to control this disease. The DPT
vaccine was once in common use in the United States. In that vaccine, the P component consisted of killed whole-
cell B. pertussis preparations. Because of some adverse effects, that preparation has now been superseded by the
DTaP and Tdap vaccines. In both of these new vaccines, the “aP” component is a pertussis toxoid.
Widespread vaccination has greatly reduced the number of reported cases and prevented large epidemics of
pertussis. Recently, however, pertussis has begun to reemerge as a childhood disease in some states because of
declining vaccination rates and an increasing population of susceptible children.
LINK TO LEARNING
This web page (https://openstax.org/l/22pertussaudio) contains an audio clip of the distinctive “whooping” sound
associated with pertussis in infants.
This interactive map (https://openstax.org/l/22intmapprevacc) shows outbreaks of vaccine preventable diseases,
including pertussis, around the world.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What accounts for the mucus production in a pertussis infection?
• What are the signs and symptoms associated with the three stages of pertussis?
12 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “2012 Final Pertussis Surveillance Report.” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/
downloads/pertuss-surv-report-2012.pdf. Accessed July 6, 2016.
13 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “2015 Provisional Pertussis Surveillance Report.” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/
downloads/pertuss-surv-report-2015-provisional.pdf. Accessed July 6, 2016.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 901 ===
22.2 • Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract 887
• Why is pertussis becoming more common in the United States?
Legionnaires Disease
An atypical pneumonia called Legionnaires disease (also known as legionellosis) is caused by an aerobic gram-
negative bacillus, Legionella pneumophila. This bacterium infects free-living amoebae that inhabit moist
environments, and infections typically occur from human-made reservoirs such as air-conditioning cooling towers,
humidifiers, misting systems, and fountains. Aerosols from these reservoirs can lead to infections of susceptible
individuals, especially those suffering from chronic heart or lung disease or other conditions that weaken the
immune system.
When L. pneumophila bacteria enter the alveoli, they are phagocytized by resident macrophages. However, L.
pneumophila uses a secretion system to insert proteins in the endosomal membrane of the macrophage; these
proteins prevent lysosomal fusion, allowing L. pneumophila to continue to proliferate within the phagosome. The
resulting respiratory disease can range from mild to severe pneumonia, depending on the status of the host’s
immune defenses. Although this disease primarily affects the lungs, it can also cause fever, nausea, vomiting,
confusion, and other neurological effects.
Diagnosis of Legionnaires disease is somewhat complicated. L. pneumophila is a fastidious bacterium and is difficult
to culture. In addition, since the bacterial cells are not efficiently stained with the Gram stain, other staining
techniques, such as the Warthin-Starry silver-precipitate procedure, must be used to visualize this pathogen. A rapid
diagnostic test has been developed that detects the presence of Legionella antigen in a patient’s urine; results take
less than 1 hour, and the test has high selectivity and specificity (greater than 90%). Unfortunately, the test only
works for one serotype of L. pneumophila (type 1, the serotype responsible for most infections). Consequently,
isolation and identification of L. pneumophila from sputum remains the defining test for diagnosis.
Once diagnosed, Legionnaire disease can be effectively treated with fluoroquinolone and macrolide antibiotics.
14
However, the disease is sometimes fatal; about 10% of patients die of complications. There is currently no
vaccine available.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Why is Legionnaires disease associated with air-conditioning systems?
• How does Legionella pneumophila circumvent the immune system?
Q Fever
The zoonotic disease Q fever is caused by a rickettsia, Coxiella burnetii. The primary reservoirs for this bacterium
are domesticated livestock such as cattle, sheep, and goats. The bacterium may be transmitted by ticks or through
exposure to the urine, feces, milk, or amniotic fluid of an infected animal. In humans, the primary route of infection
is through inhalation of contaminated farmyard aerosols. It is, therefore, largely an occupational disease of farmers.
15
Humans are acutely sensitive to C. burnetii—the infective dose is estimated to be just a few cells. In addition, the
organism is hardy and can survive in a dry environment for an extended time. Symptoms associated with acute Q
fever include high fever, headache, coughing, pneumonia, and general malaise. In a small number of patients (less
16
than 5% ), the condition may become chronic, often leading to endocarditis, which may be fatal.
Diagnosing rickettsial infection by cultivation in the laboratory is both difficult and hazardous because of the easy
aerosolization of the bacteria, so PCR and ELISA are commonly used. Doxycycline is the first-line drug to treat acute
Q fever. In chronic Q fever, doxycycline is often paired with hydroxychloroquine.
14 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Legionella (Legionnaires’ Disease and Pontiac Fever: Diagnosis, Treatment, and
Complications).” http://www.cdc.gov/legionella/about/diagnosis.html. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.
15 WD Tigertt et al. “Airborne Q Fever.” Bacteriological Reviews 25 no. 3 (1961):285–293.
16 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Q fever. Symptoms, Diagnosis, and Treatment.” 2013. http://www.cdc.gov/qfever/
symptoms/index.html. Accessed July 6, 2016.
=== PDF PAGE 902 ===
888 22 • Respiratory System Infections
DISEASE PROFILE
Bacterial Diseases of the Respiratory Tract
Numerous pathogens can cause infections of the respiratory tract. Many of these infections produce similar
signs and symptoms, but appropriate treatment depends on accurate diagnosis through laboratory testing. The
tables in Figure 22.15 and Figure 22.16 summarize the most important bacterial respiratory infections, with the
latter focusing specifically on forms of bacterial pneumonia.
FIGURE 22.15
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 903 ===
22.3 • Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract 889
FIGURE 22.16
22.3 Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the most common viruses that can cause infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract
• Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases of the respiratory tract
=== PDF PAGE 904 ===
890 22 • Respiratory System Infections
Viruses are the most frequent cause of respiratory tract infections. Unlike the bacterial pathogens, we have few
effective therapies to combat viral respiratory infections. Fortunately, many of these diseases are mild and self-
limiting. A few respiratory infections manifest their primary symptoms at other locations in the body.
The Common Cold
The common cold is a generic term for a variety of mild viral infections of the nasal cavity. More than 200 different
viruses are known to cause the common cold. The most common groups of cold viruses include rhinoviruses,
coronaviruses, and adenoviruses. These infections are widely disseminated in the human population and are
transmitted through direct contact and droplet transmission. Coughing and sneezing efficiently produce infectious
17
aerosols, and rhinoviruses are known to persist on environmental surfaces for up to a week.
Viral contact with the nasal mucosa or eyes can lead to infection. Rhinoviruses tend to replicate best between 33 °C
(91.4 °F) and 35 °C (95 °F), somewhat below normal body temperature (37 °C [98.6 °F]). As a consequence, they
tend to infect the cooler tissues of the nasal cavities. Colds are marked by an irritation of the mucosa that leads to
an inflammatory response. This produces common signs and symptoms such as nasal excess nasal secretions
(runny nose), congestion, sore throat, coughing, and sneezing. The absence of high fever is typically used to
differentiate common colds from other viral infections, like influenza. Some colds may progress to cause otitis
media, pharyngitis, or laryngitis, and patients may also experience headaches and body aches. The disease,
however, is self-limiting and typically resolves within 1–2 weeks.
There are no effective antiviral treatments for the common cold and antibacterial drugs should not be prescribed
unless secondary bacterial infections have been established. Many of the viruses that cause colds are related, so
immunity develops throughout life. Given the number of viruses that cause colds, however, individuals are never
likely to develop immunity to all causes of the common cold.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How are colds transmitted?
• What is responsible for the symptoms of a cold?
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 3
Since antibiotic treatment had proven ineffective, John’s doctor suspects that a viral or fungal pathogen may be
the culprit behind John’s case of pneumonia. Another possibility is that John could have an antibiotic-resistant
bacterial infection that will require a different antibiotic or combination of antibiotics to clear.
The RIDT tests both came back negative for type A and type B influenza. However, the diagnostic laboratory
identified the sputum isolate as Legionella pneumophila. The doctor ordered tests of John’s urine and, on the
second day after his admission, results of an enzyme immunoassay (EIA) were positive for the Legionella
antigen. John’s doctor added levofloxacin to his antibiotic therapy and continued to monitor him. The doctor also
began to ask John where he had been over the past 10 to 14 days.
• Do negative RIDT results absolutely rule out influenza virus as the etiologic agent? Why or why not?
• What is John’s prognosis?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
Influenza
Commonly known as the flu, influenza is a common viral disease caused by an orthomyxovirus that primarily affects
the upper respiratory tract but can also extend into the lower respiratory tract. Influenza is pervasive worldwide and
causes 3,000–50,000 deaths each year in the United States. The annual mortality rate can vary greatly depending
18
on the virulence of the strain(s) responsible for seasonal epidemics.
17 AG L’Huillier et al. “Survival of Rhinoviruses on Human Fingers.” Clinical Microbiology and Infection 21, no. 4 (2015):381–385.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 905 ===
22.3 • Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract 891
Influenza infections are most typically characterized by fever, chills, and body aches. This is followed by symptoms
similar to the common cold that may last a week or more. Table 22.2 compares the signs and symptoms of influenza
and the common cold.
Comparing the Common Cold and Influenza
Sign/Symptom Common Cold Influenza
Fever Low (37.2 °C [99 °F]) High (39 °C [102.2 °F])
Headache Common Common
Aches and pains Mild Severe
Fatigue Slight Severe
Nasal congestion Common Rare
Sneezing Common Rare
TABLE 22.2
In general, influenza is self-limiting. However, serious cases can lead to pneumonia and other complications that
can be fatal. Such cases are more common in the very young and the elderly; however, certain strains of influenza
virus (like the 1918–1919 variant discussed later in this chapter) are more lethal to young adults than to the very
young or old. Strains that affect young adults are believed to involve a cytokine storm—a positive feedback loop that
forms between cytokine production and leukocytes. This cytokine storm produces an acute inflammatory response
that leads to rapid fluid accumulation in the lungs, culminating in pulmonary failure. In such cases, the ability to
mount a vigorous immune response is actually detrimental to the patient. The very young and very old are less
susceptible to this effect because their immune systems are less robust.
A complication of influenza that occurs primarily in children and teenagers is Reye syndrome. This sequela causes
swelling in the liver and brain, and may progress to neurological damage, coma, or death. Reye syndrome may follow
other viral infections, like chickenpox, and has been associated with the use of aspirin. For this reason, the CDC and
other agencies recommend that aspirin and products containing aspirin never be used to treat viral illnesses in
19
children younger than age 19 years.
The influenza virus is primarily transmitted by direct contact and inhalation of aerosols. The RNA genome of this
virus exists as seven or eight segments, each coated with ribonucleoprotein and encoding one or two specific viral
proteins. The influenza virus is surrounded by a lipid membrane envelope, and two of the main antigens of the
influenza virus are the spike proteins hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N), as shown in Figure 22.17. These
spike proteins play important roles in the viral infectious cycle.
18 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Estimating Seasonal Influenza-Associated Deaths in the United States: CDC Study
Confirms Variability of Flu.” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/disease/us_flu-related_deaths.htm. Accessed July 6, 2016.
19 ED Belay et al. “Reye’s Syndrome in the United States From 1981 Through 1997.” New England Journal of Medicine 340 no. 18
(1999):1377–1382.
=== PDF PAGE 906 ===
892 22 • Respiratory System Infections
FIGURE 22.17 The illustration shows the structure of an influenza virus. The viral envelope is studded with copies of the proteins
neuraminidase and hemagglutinin, and surrounds the individual seven or eight RNA genome segments. (credit: modification of work by Dan
Higgins, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Following inhalation, the influenza virus uses the hemagglutinin protein to bind to sialic acid receptors on host
respiratory epithelial cells. This facilitates endocytosis of the viral particle. Once inside the host cell, the negative
strand viral RNA is replicated by the viral RNA polymerase to form mRNA, which is translated by the host to produce
viral proteins. Additional viral RNA molecules are transcribed to produce viral genomic RNA, which assemble with
viral proteins to form mature virions. Release of the virions from the host cell is facilitated by viral neuraminidase,
which cleaves sialic-acid receptors to allow progeny viruses to make a clean exit when budding from an infected
cell.
There are three genetically related influenza viruses, called A, B, and C. The influenza A viruses have different
subtypes based on the structure of their hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins. There are currently 18 known
subtypes of hemagglutinin and 11 known subtypes of neuraminidase. Influenza viruses are serologically
characterized by the type of H and N proteins that they possess. Of the nearly 200 different combinations of H and
N, only a few, such as the H1N1 strain, are associated with human disease. The influenza viruses A, B, and C make
up three of the five major groups of orthomyxoviruses. The differences between the three types of influenza are
summarized in Table 22.3. The most virulent group is the influenza A viruses, which cause seasonal pandemics of
influenza each year. Influenza A virus can infect a variety of animals, including pigs, horses, and even whales and
dolphins. Influenza B virus is less virulent and is sometimes associated with epidemic outbreaks. Influenza C virus
generally produces the mildest disease symptoms and is rarely connected with epidemics. Neither influenza B virus
nor influenza C virus has significant animal reservoirs.
The Three Major Groups of Influenza Viruses
Influenza A virus Influenza B virus Influenza C virus
Severity Severe Moderate Mild
Animal reservoir Yes No No
Genome segments 8 8 7
Population spread Epidemic and pandemic Epidemic Sporadic
Antigenic variation Shift/drift Drift Drift
TABLE 22.3
Influenza virus infections elicit a strong immune response, particularly to the hemagglutinin protein, which would
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 907 ===
22.3 • Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract 893
protect the individual if they encountered the same virus. Unfortunately, the antigenic properties of the virus change
relatively rapidly, so new strains are evolving that immune systems previously challenged by influenza virus cannot
recognize. When an influenza virus gains a new hemagglutinin or neuraminidase type, it is able to evade the host’s
immune response and be successfully transmitted, often leading to an epidemic.
There are two mechanisms by which these evolutionary changes may occur. The mechanisms of antigen drift and
antigenic shift for influenza virus have been described in Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens. Of these
two genetic processes, it is viruses produced by antigenic shift that have the potential to be extremely virulent
because individuals previously infected by other strains are unlikely to produce any protective immune response
against these novel variants.
The most lethal influenza pandemic in recorded history occurred from 1918 through 1919. Near the end of World
War I, an antigenic shift involving the recombination of avian and human viruses is thought to have produced a new
H1N1 virus. This strain rapidly spread worldwide and is commonly claimed to have killed as many as 40 million to
50 million people—more than double the number killed in the war. Although referred to as the Spanish flu, this
disease is thought to have originated in the United States. Regardless of its source, the conditions of World War I
greatly contributed to the spread of this disease. Crowding, poor sanitation, and rapid mobilization of large numbers
of personnel and animals facilitated the dissemination of the new virus once it appeared.
Several of the most important influenza pandemics of modern times have been associated with antigenic shifts. A
few of these are summarized in Table 22.4.
202122
Historical Influenza Outbreaks
Years Common Name Serotype Estimated Number of Deaths
1918–1919 Spanish flu H1N1 20,000,000–40,000,000
1957–1958 Asian flu N2N2 1,000,000–2,000,000
1968–1969 Hong Kong flu H3N2 1,000,000–3,000,000
2009–2010 Swine flu H1N1/09 152,000–575,000
TABLE 22.4
Laboratory diagnosis of influenza is typically performed using a variety of RIDTs. These tests are inoculated by point-
of-care personnel and give results within 15–20 minutes. Unfortunately, these tests have variable sensitivity and
commonly yield false-negative results. Other tests include hemagglutination of erythrocytes (due to hemagglutinin
action) or complement fixation. Patient serum antibodies against influenza viruses can also be detected in blood
samples. Because influenza is self-limiting disease, diagnosis through these more time-consuming and expensive
methods is not typically used.
20 CE Mills et al. “Transmissibility of 1918 Pandemic Influenza.” Nature 432, no. 7019 (2004):904–906.
21 E. Tognotti. “Influenza Pandemics: A Historical Retrospect.” Journal of Infection in Developing Countries 3, no. 5 (2009):331–334.
22 FS Dawood et al. “Estimated Global Mortality Associated with the First 12 Months of 2009 Pandemic Influenza A H1N1 Virus
Circulation: A Modelling Study.” The Lancet Infectious Diseases 12, no. 9 (2012):687–695.
=== PDF PAGE 908 ===
894 22 • Respiratory System Infections
Three drugs that inhibit influenza neuraminidase activity are available: inhaled zanamivir, oral oseltamivir, and
intravenous peramivir. If taken at the onset of symptoms, these drugs can shorten the course of the disease. These
drugs are thought to impair the ability of the virus to efficiently exit infected host cells. A more effective means of
controlling influenza outbreaks, though, is vaccination. Every year, new influenza vaccines are developed to be
effective against the strains expected to be predominant. This is determined in February by a review of the dominant
strains around the world from a network of reporting sites; their reports are used to generate a recommendation for
the vaccine combination for the following winter in the northern hemisphere. In September, a similar
23
recommendation is made for the winter in the southern hemisphere. These recommendations are used by
vaccine manufacturers to formulate each year’s vaccine. In most cases, three or four viruses are selected—the two
most prevalent influenza A strains and one or two influenza B strains. The chosen strains are typically cultivated in
eggs and used to produce either an inactivated or a live attenuated vaccine (e.g., FluMist). For individuals 18 years
or older with an allergy to egg products, a recombinant egg-free trivalent vaccine is available. Most of the influenza
24
vaccines over the past decade have had an effectiveness of about 50%.
CASE IN POINT
Flu Pandemic
During the spring of 2013, a new strain of H7N9 influenza was reported in China. A total of 132 people were
infected. Of those infected, 44 (33%) died. A genetic analysis of the virus suggested that this strain arose from
the reassortment of three different influenza viruses: a domestic duck H7N3 virus, a wild bird H7N9 virus, and a
domestic poultry H9N2 virus. The virus was detected in the Chinese domestic bird flocks and contact with this
reservoir is thought to have been the primary source of infection. This strain of influenza was not able to spread
from person to person. Therefore, the disease did not become a global problem. This case does, though,
illustrate the potential threat that influenza still represents. If a strain like the H7N9 virus were to undergo
another antigenic shift, it could become more communicable in the human population. With a mortality rate of
33%, such a pandemic would be disastrous. For this reason, organizations like the World Health Organization
and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention keep all known influenza outbreaks under constant
surveillance.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Compare the severity of the three types of influenza viruses.
• Why must new influenza vaccines be developed each year?
Viral Pneumonia
Viruses cause fewer cases of pneumonia than bacteria; however, several viruses can lead to pneumonia in children
and the elderly. The most common sources of viral pneumonia are adenoviruses, influenza viruses, parainfluenza
viruses, and respiratory syncytial viruses. The signs and symptoms produced by these viruses can range from mild
cold-like symptoms to severe cases of pneumonia, depending on the virulence of the virus strain and the strength of
the host defenses of the infected individual. Occasionally, infections can result in otitis media.
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections are fairly common in infants; most people have been infected by the age
of 2 years. During infection, a viral surface protein causes host cells to fuse and form multinucleated giant cells
called syncytia. There are no specific antiviral therapies or vaccines available for viral pneumonia. In adults, these
infections are self-limiting, resemble the common cold, and tend to resolve uneventfully within 1 or 2 weeks.
Infections in infants, however, can be life-threatening. RSV is highly contagious and can be spread through
respiratory droplets from coughing and sneezing. RSV can also survive for a long time on environmental surfaces
and, thus, be transmitted indirectly via fomites.
23 World Health Organization. “WHO Report on Global Surveillance of Epidemic-Prone Infectious Diseases.” 2000. http://www.who.int/
csr/resources/publications/surveillance/Influenza.pdf. Accessed July 6, 2016.
24 Centers of Disease Control and Prevention. “Vaccine Effectiveness - How Well Does the Flu Vaccine Work?” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/
flu/about/qa/vaccineeffect.htm. Accessed July 6, 2016.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 909 ===
22.3 • Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract 895
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Who is most likely to contract viral pneumonia?
• What is the recommended treatment for viral pneumonia?
SARS and MERS
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) are two acute respiratory
infections caused by coronaviruses. In both cases, these are thought to be zoonotic infections. Bats and civet cats
are thought to have been the reservoirs for SARS; camels seem to be the reservoir for MERS.
SARS originated in southern China in the winter of 2002 and rapidly spread to 37 countries. Within about 1 year,
more than 8,000 people experienced influenza-like symptoms and nearly 800 people died. The rapid spread and
severity of these infections caused grave concern at the time. However, the outbreak was controlled in 2003 and no
25
further cases of SARS have been recorded since 2004. Signs and symptoms of SARS include high fever, headache,
body aches, and cough, and most patients will develop pneumonia.
MERS was first reported in Saudi Arabia in 2013. Although some infected individuals will be asymptomatic or have
mild cold-like symptoms, most will develop a high fever, aches, cough and a severe respiratory infection that can
progress to pneumonia. As of 2015, over 1,300 people in 27 countries have been infected. About 500 people have
died. There are no specific treatments for either MERS or SARS. In addition, no vaccines are currently available.
Several recombinant vaccines, however, are being developed.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What is the cause of SARS?
• What are the signs and symptoms of MERS?
Viral Respiratory Diseases Causing Skin Rashes
Measles, rubella (German measles), and chickenpox are three important viral diseases often associated with skin
rashes. However, their symptoms are systemic, and because their portal of entry is the respiratory tract, they can be
considered respiratory infections.
Measles (Rubeola)
The measles virus (MeV) causes the highly contagious disease measles, also known as rubeola, which is a major
cause of childhood mortality worldwide. Although vaccination efforts have greatly reduced the incidence of measles
26
in much of the world, epidemics are still common in unvaccinated populations in certain countries.
The measles virus is a single-stranded, negative-strand RNA virus and, like the influenza virus, it possesses an
envelope with spikes of embedded hemagglutinin. The infection is spread by direct contact with infectious
secretions or inhalation of airborne droplets spread by breathing, coughing, or sneezing. Measles is initially
characterized by a high fever, conjunctivitis, and a sore throat. The virus then moves systemically through the
bloodstream and causes a characteristic rash. The measles rash initially forms on the face and later spreads to the
extremities. The red, raised macular rash will eventually become confluent and can last for several days. At the
same time, extremely high fevers (higher than 40.6 °C [105 °F]) can occur. Another diagnostic sign of measles
infections is Koplik’s spots, white spots that form on the inner lining of inflamed cheek tissues (Figure 22.18).
25 Y. Huang. “The SARS Epidemic and Its Aftermath in China: A Political Perspective.” In Learning from SARS: Preparing for the Next
Disease Outbreak. Edited by S. Knobler et al. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2004. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
books/NBK92479/
26 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Global Health - Measles, Rubella, and CRS, Eliminating Measles, Rubella & Congenital
Rubella Syndrome (CRS) Worldwide.” 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/globalhealth/measles/. Accessed July 7, 2016.
=== PDF PAGE 910 ===
896 22 • Respiratory System Infections
FIGURE 22.18 (a and b) Measles typically presents as a raised macular rash that begins on the face and spreads to the extremities. (c)
Koplik’s spots on the oral mucosa are also characteristic of measles. (d) A thin-section transmission electron micrograph of a measles
virion. (credit a: a. Betty G. Partin /CDC.; b, c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Although measles is usually self-limiting, it can lead to pneumonia, encephalitis, and death. In addition, the
inhibition of immune system cells by the measles virus predisposes patients to secondary infections. In severe
infections with highly virulent strains, measles fatality rates can be as high as 10% to 15%. There were more than
27
145,000 measles deaths (mostly young children) worldwide in 2013.
The preliminary diagnosis of measles is typically based on the appearance of the rash and Koplik’s spots.
Hemagglutination inhibition tests and serological tests may be used to confirm measles infections in low-prevalence
settings.
There are no effective treatments for measles. Vaccination is widespread in developed countries as part of the
measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine. As a result, there are typically fewer than 200 cases of measles in the
28
United States annually. When it is seen, it is often associated with children who have not been vaccinated.
MICRO CONNECTIONS
Preventable Measles Outbreaks
In December 2014, a measles epidemic began at Disneyland in southern California. Within just 4 months, this
29
outbreak affected 134 people in 24 states. Characterization of the virus suggests that an unidentified infected
individual brought the disease to the United States from the Philippines, where a similar virus had sickened more
30
than 58,000 people and killed 110. Measles is highly communicable, and its spread at Disneyland may have been
31
facilitated by the low vaccination rate in some communities in California.
27 World Health Organization. “Measles Factsheet.” 2016. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs286/en/. Accessed July 7, 2016.
28 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Measles Cases and Outbreaks.” 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/measles/cases-
outbreaks.html. Accessed July 7, 2016.
29 Ibid.
30 World Health Organization. “Measles-Rubella Bulletin.” Manila, Philippines; Expanded Programme on Immunization Regional Office for
the Western Pacific World Health Organization; 9 no. 1 (2015). http://www.wpro.who.int/immunization/documents/
mrbulletinvol9issue1.pdf
31 M. Bloch et al. “Vaccination Rates for Every Kindergartener in California.” The New York Times February 6, 2015.
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/02/06/us/california-measles-vaccines-map.html?_r=1. Accessed July 7, 2016.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 911 ===
22.3 • Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract 897
Several factors could conceivably lead to a strong comeback of measles in the U.S. Measles is still an epidemic
disease in many locations worldwide. Air travel enables infected individuals to rapidly translocate these infections
globally. Compounding this problem, low vaccination rates in some communities in the United States provide
populations of susceptible hosts for the virus to establish itself. Finally, measles has been a low-prevalence
infection in the U.S. for some time. As a consequence, physicians are not as likely to recognize the initial symptoms
and make accurate diagnoses. Until vaccination rates become high enough to ensure herd immunity, measles is
likely to be an ongoing problem in the United States.
Rubella (German Measles)
Rubella, or the German measles, is a relatively mild viral disease that produces a rash somewhat like that caused by
the measles, even though the two diseases are unrelated. The rubella virus is an enveloped RNA virus that can be
found in the respiratory tract. It is transmitted from person to person in aerosols produced by coughing or sneezing.
Nearly half of all infected people remain asymptomatic. However, the virus is shed and spread by asymptomatic
carriers. Like rubeola, rubella begins with a facial rash that spreads to the extremities (Figure 22.19). However, the
rash is less intense, shorter lived (2–3 days), not associated with Koplik’s spots, and the resulting fever is lower (101
°F [38.3 °C]).
Congenital rubella syndrome is the most severe clinical complication of the German measles. This occurs if a person
is infected with rubella during pregnancy. The rubella virus is teratogenic, meaning it can cause developmental
defects if it crosses the placenta during pregnancy. There is a very high incidence of stillbirth, spontaneous abortion,
or congenital birth defects if a person is infected before 11 weeks of pregnancy and 35% if they are infected
32
between weeks 13–16; after this time the incidence is low. For this reason, prenatal screening for rubella is
commonly practiced in the United States. Postnatal infections are usually self-limiting and rarely cause severe
complications.
Like measles, the preliminary diagnosis of rubella is based on the patient’s history, vaccination records, and the
appearance of the rash. The diagnosis can be confirmed by hemagglutinin inhibition assays and a variety of other
immunological techniques. There are no antiviral therapies for rubella, but an effective vaccine (MMR) is widely
available. Vaccination efforts have essentially eliminated rubella in the United States; fewer than a dozen cases are
reported in a typical year.
FIGURE 22.19 (a) This photograph shows the appearance of the German measles (rubella) rash. Note that this is less intense than the rash
of measles and the lesions are not confluent. (b) This transmission electron micrograph shows rubella virus virions just budding from a host
cell. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Chickenpox and Shingles
Chickenpox, also known as varicella, was once a common viral childhood disease. The causative agent of
chickenpox, the varicella-zoster virus, is a member of the herpesvirus family. In children, the disease is mild and
32 E. Miller et al. “Consequences of Confirmed Maternal Rubella at Successive Stages of Pregnancy.” The Lancet 320, no. 8302
(1982):781–784.
=== PDF PAGE 912 ===
898 22 • Respiratory System Infections
self-limiting, and is easily transmitted by direct contact or inhalation of material from the skin lesions. In adults,
however, chickenpox infections can be much more severe and can lead to pneumonia and birth defects in the case
of infected pregnant people. Reye syndrome, mentioned earlier in this chapter, is also a serious complication
associated with chickenpox, generally in children.
Once infected, most individuals acquire a lifetime immunity to future chickenpox outbreaks. For this reason, parents
once held “chickenpox parties” for their children. At these events, uninfected children were intentionally exposed to
an infected individual so they would contract the disease earlier in life, when the incidence of complications is very
low, rather than risk a more severe infection later.
After the initial viral exposure, chickenpox has an incubation period of about 2 weeks. The initial infection of the
respiratory tract leads to viremia and eventually produces fever and chills. A pustular rash then develops on the
face, progresses to the trunk, and then the extremities, although most form on the trunk (Figure 22.20). Eventually,
the lesions burst and form a crusty scab. Individuals with chickenpox are infectious from about 2 days before the
outbreak of the rash until all the lesions have scabbed over.
FIGURE 22.20 (a) and (b) The characteristic appearance of the pustular chickenpox rash is concentrated on the trunk region. (c) This
transmission electron micrograph shows a virion of human herpesvirus 3, the virus that causes chickenpox in children and shingles when it
is reactivated in adults. Credit b: John Noble/CDC. c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Like other herpesviruses, the varicella-zoster virus can become dormant in nerve cells. While the pustular vesicles
are developing, the virus moves along sensory nerves to the dorsal ganglia in the spinal cord. Once there, the
varicella-zoster virus can remain latent for decades. These dormant viruses may be reactivated later in life by a
variety of stimuli, including stress, aging, and immunosuppression. Once reactivated, the virus moves along sensory
nerves to the skin of the face or trunk. This results in the production of the painful lesions in a condition known as
shingles (Figure 22.21). These symptoms generally last for 2–6 weeks, and may recur more than once. Postherpetic
neuralgia, pain signals sent from damaged nerves long after the other symptoms have subsided, is also possible. In
addition, the virus can spread to other organs in immunocompromised individuals. A person with shingles lesions
can transmit the virus to a nonimmune contact, and the newly infected individual would develop chickenpox as the
primary infection. Shingles cannot be transmitted from one person to another.
The primary diagnosis of chickenpox in children is mainly based on the presentation of a pustular rash of the trunk.
Serological and PCR-based tests are available to confirm the initial diagnosis. Treatment for chickenpox infections in
children is usually not required. In patients with shingles, acyclovir treatment can often reduce the severity and
length of symptoms, and diminish the risk of postherpetic neuralgia. An effective vaccine is now available for
chickenpox. A vaccine is also available for adults older than 60 years who were infected with chickenpox in their
youth. This vaccine reduces the likelihood of a shingles outbreak by boosting the immune defenses that are keeping
the latent infection in check and preventing reactivation.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 913 ===
22.3 • Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract 899
FIGURE 22.21 (a and b) An individual suffering from shingles. (c) The rash is formed because of the reactivation of a varicella-zoster
infection that was initially contracted in childhood. (credit a: modification of work by National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
(NIAID); credit b: Robert E. Sumpter/CDC.; credit c: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Why does measles often lead to secondary infections?
• What signs or symptoms would distinguish rubella and measles?
• Why can chickenpox lead to shingles later in life?
EYE ON ETHICS
Smallpox Stockpiles
Smallpox has probably killed more humans than any other infectious disease, with the possible exception of
tuberculosis. This disease, caused by the variola major virus, is transmitted by inhalation of viral particles shed
from lesions in the throat. The smallpox virus spreads systemically in the bloodstream and produces a pustular
skin rash. Historical epidemics of smallpox had fatality rates of 50% or greater in susceptible populations.
Concerted worldwide vaccination efforts eradicated smallpox from the general population in 1977. This was the
first microbial disease in history to be eradicated, a feat made possible by the fact that the only reservoir for the
smallpox virus is infected humans.
Although the virus is no longer present in the wild, laboratory samples of the virus still exist in the United States
33
and Russia. The question is, why do these samples still exist? Some claim that these stocks should be
maintained for research purposes. Should the smallpox virus ever reappear, they say, we would need access to
such stocks for development of vaccines and treatments. Concerns about a re-emergence of the virus are not
totally unfounded. Although there are no living reservoirs of the virus, there is always the possibility that
smallpox could re-emerge from mummified human bodies or human remains preserved in permafrost. It is also
possible that there are as-yet undiscovered samples of the virus in other locations around the world. An
example of such "lost" samples was discovered in a drawer in a Food and Drug Administration lab in
34
Maryland. If an outbreak from such a source were to occur, it could lead to uncontrolled epidemics, since the
population is largely unvaccinated now.
Critics of this argument, including many research scientists and the World Health Organization, claim that there
is no longer any rational argument for keeping the samples. They view the “re-emergence scenarios” as a thinly
veiled pretense for harboring biological weapons. These scenarios, they say, are less probable than an
intentional reintroduction of the virus from militarized stocks by humans. Furthermore, they point out that if we
needed to research smallpox in the future, we could rebuild the virus from its DNA sequence.
What do you think? Are there legitimate arguments for maintaining stockpiles of smallpox, or should all forms of
this deadly disease be eradicated?
33 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “CDC Media Statement on Newly Discovered Smallpox Specimens.” July 8, 2014.
http://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2014/s0708-nih.html. Accessed on July 7, 2016.
34 Ibid.
=== PDF PAGE 914 ===
900 22 • Respiratory System Infections
DISEASE PROFILE
Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract
Many viruses are capable of entering and causing disease in the respiratory system, and a number are able to
spread beyond the respiratory system to cause systemic infections. Most of these infections are highly
contagious and, with a few exceptions, antimicrobial drugs are not effective for treatment. Although some of
these infections are self-limiting, others can have serious or fatal complications. Effective vaccines have been
developed for several of these diseases, as summarized in Figure 22.22.
FIGURE 22.22
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 915 ===
22.4 • Respiratory Mycoses 901
22.4 Respiratory Mycoses
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the most common fungi that can cause infections of the respiratory tract
• Compare the major characteristics of specific fungal diseases of the respiratory tract
Fungal pathogens are ubiquitous in the environment. Serological studies have demonstrated that most people have
been exposed to fungal respiratory pathogens during their lives. Yet symptomatic infections by these microbes are
rare in healthy individuals. This demonstrates the efficacy of the defenses of our respiratory system. In this section,
we will examine some of the fungi that can cause respiratory infections.
Histoplasmosis
Histoplasmosis is a fungal disease of the respiratory system and most commonly occurs in the Mississippi Valley of
the United States and in parts of Central and South America, Africa, Asia, and Australia. The causative agent,
Histoplasma capsulatum, is a dimorphic fungus. This microbe grows as a filamentous mold in the environment but
occurs as a budding yeast during human infections. The primary reservoir for this pathogen is soil, particularly in
locations rich in bat or bird feces.
Histoplasmosis is acquired by inhaling microconidial spores in the air; this disease is not transmitted from human to
human. The incidence of histoplasmosis exposure is high in endemic areas, with 60%–90% of the population
35
having anti-Histoplasma antibodies, depending on location; however, relatively few individuals exposed to the
fungus actually experience symptoms. Those most likely to be affected are the very young, the elderly, and
immunocompromised people.
In many ways, the course of this disease is similar to that of tuberculosis. Following inhalation, the spores enter the
lungs and are phagocytized by alveolar macrophages. The fungal cells then survive and multiply within these
phagocytes (see Figure 5.26). Focal infections cause the formation of granulomatous lesions, which can lead to
calcifications that resemble the Ghon complexes of tuberculosis, even in asymptomatic cases. Also like
tuberculosis, histoplasmosis can become chronic and reactivation can occur, along with dissemination to other
areas of the body (e.g., the liver or spleen).
Signs and symptoms of pulmonary histoplasmosis include fever, headache, and weakness with some chest
discomfort. The initial diagnosis is often based on chest radiographs and cultures grown on fungal selective media
like Sabouraud's dextrose agar. Direct fluorescence antibody staining and Giemsa staining can also be used to
detect this pathogen. In addition, serological tests including a complement fixation assay and histoplasmin
sensitivity can be used to confirm the diagnosis. In most cases, these infections are self-limiting and antifungal
therapy is not required. However, in disseminated disease, the antifungal agents amphotericin B and ketoconazole
are effective; itraconazole may be effective in immunocompromised patients, in whom the disease can be more
serious.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• In what environments is one more likely to be infected with histoplasmosis?
• Identify at least two similarities between histoplasmosis and tuberculosis.
Coccidioidomycosis
Infection by the dimorphic fungus Coccidioides immitis causes coccidioidomycosis. Because the microbe is
endemic to the San Joaquin Valley of California, the disease is sometimes referred to as Valley fever. A related
species that causes similar infections is found in semi-arid and arid regions of the southwestern United States,
36
Mexico, and Central and South America.
Like histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis is acquired by inhaling fungal spores—in this case, arthrospores formed by
35 NE Manos et al. “Geographic Variation in the Prevalence of Histoplasmin Sensitivity.” Dis Chest 29, no. 6 (1956):649–668.
36 DR Hospenthal. “Coccioidomycosis.” Medscape. 2015. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/215978-overview. Accessed July 7,
2016.
=== PDF PAGE 916 ===
902 22 • Respiratory System Infections
hyphal fragmentation. Once in the body, the fungus differentiates into spherules that are filled with endospores.
Most C. immitis infections are asymptomatic and self-limiting. However, the infection can be very serious for
immunocompromised patients. The endospores may be transported in the blood, disseminating the infection and
leading to the formation of granulomatous lesions on the face and nose (Figure 22.23). In severe cases, other major
organs can become infected, leading to serious complications such as fatal meningitis.
Coccidioidomycosis can be diagnosed by culturing clinical samples. C. immitis readily grows on laboratory fungal
media, such as Sabouraud's dextrose agar, at 35 °C (95 °F). Culturing the fungus, however, is rather dangerous. C.
immitis is one of the most infectious fungal pathogens known and is capable of causing laboratory-acquired
infections. Indeed, until 2012, this organism was considered a “select agent” of bioterrorism and classified as a
BSL-3 microbe. Serological tests for antibody production are more often used for diagnosis. Although mild cases
generally do not require intervention, disseminated infections can be treated with intravenous antifungal drugs like
amphotericin B.
FIGURE 22.23 (a) This patient has extensive facial lesions due to a disseminated Coccidioides infection. (b) This fluorescent micrograph
depicts a spherule of C. immitis containing endospores. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
CLINICAL FOCUS
Resolution
John’s negative RIDT tests do not rule out influenza, since false-negative results are common, but the Legionella
infection still must be treated with antibiotic therapy and is the more serious condition. John's prognosis is good,
provided the physician can find an antibiotic therapy to which the infection responds.
While John was undergoing treatment, three of the employees from the home improvement store also reported
to the clinic with very similar symptoms. All three were older than 55 years and had Legionella antigen in their
urine; L. pneumophila was also isolated from their sputum. A team from the health department was sent to the
home improvement store to identify a probable source for these infections. Their investigation revealed that
about 3 weeks earlier, the store's air conditioning system, which was located where the employees ate lunch,
had been undergoing maintenance. L. pneumophila was isolated from the cooling coils of the air conditioning
system and intracellular L. pneumophila was observed in amoebae in samples of condensed water from the
cooling coils as well (Figure 22.24). The amoebae provide protection for the Legionella bacteria and are known
37
to enhance their pathogenicity.
In the wake of the infections, the store ordered a comprehensive cleaning of the air conditioning system and
implemented a regular maintenance program to prevent the growth of biofilms within the cooling tower. They
also reviewed practices at their other facilities.
37 HY Lau and NJ Ashbolt. “The Role of Biofilms and Protozoa in Legionella Pathogenesis: Implications for Drinking Water.” Journal of
Applied Microbiology 107 no. 2 (2009):368–378.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 917 ===
22.4 • Respiratory Mycoses 903
After a month of rest at home, John recovered from his infection enough to return to work, as did the other three
employees of the store. However, John experienced lethargy and joint pain for more than a year after his
treatment.
FIGURE 22.24 Legionella pneumophila (red intracellular rods) infecting amoebae from a contaminated water sample. (credit:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
Blastomycosis
Blastomycosis is a rare disease caused by another dimorphic fungus, Blastomyces dermatitidis. Like Histoplasma
and Coccidioides, Blastomyces uses the soil as a reservoir, and fungal spores can be inhaled from disturbed soil.
The pulmonary form of blastomycosis generally causes mild flu-like symptoms and is self-limiting. It can, however,
become disseminated in immunocompromised people, leading to chronic cutaneous disease with subcutaneous
lesions on the face and hands (Figure 22.25). These skin lesions eventually become crusty and discolored and can
result in deforming scars. Systemic blastomycosis is rare, but if left untreated, it is always fatal.
Preliminary diagnosis of pulmonary blastomycosis can be made by observing the characteristic budding yeast forms
in sputum samples. Commercially available urine antigen tests are now also available. Additional confirmatory tests
include serological assays such as immunodiffusion tests or EIA. Most cases of blastomycosis respond well to
amphotericin B or ketoconazole treatments.
FIGURE 22.25 (a) These skin lesions are the result of disseminated cutaneous blastomycosis. (b) A differential interference contrast
micrograph of B. dermatitidis yeast cultured on blood agar. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
=== PDF PAGE 918 ===
904 22 • Respiratory System Infections
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch this profile (https://openstax.org/l/22blastlunginf) of a blastomycosis lung infection.
Mucormycosis
A variety of fungi in the order Mucorales cause mucormycosis, a rare fungal disease. These include bread molds,
like Rhizopus and Mucor; the most commonly associated species is Rhizopus arrhizus (oryzae) (see Figure 5.28).
These fungi can colonize many different tissues in immunocompromised patients, but often infect the skin, sinuses,
or the lungs.
Although most people are regularly exposed to the causative agents of mucormycosis, infections in healthy
individuals are rare. Exposure to spores from the environment typically occurs through inhalation, but the spores
can also infect the skin through a wound or the gastrointestinal tract if ingested. Respiratory mucormycosis primarily
38
affects immunocompromised individuals, such as patients with cancer or those who have had a transplant.
After the spores are inhaled, the fungi grow by extending hyphae into the host’s tissues. Infections can occur in both
the upper and lower respiratory tracts. Rhinocerebral mucormycosis is an infection of the sinuses and brain;
symptoms include headache, fever, facial swelling, congestion, and tissue necrosis causing black lesions in the oral
cavity. Pulmonary mucormycosis is an infection of the lungs; symptoms include fever, cough, chest pain, and
shortness of breath. In severe cases, infections may become disseminated and involve the central nervous system,
39
leading to coma and death.
Diagnosing mucormycosis can be challenging. Currently, there are no serological or PCR-based tests available to
identify these infections. Tissue biopsy specimens must be examined for the presence of the fungal pathogens. The
causative agents, however, are often difficult to distinguish from other filamentous fungi. Infections are typically
treated by the intravenous administration of amphotericin B, and superficial infections are removed by surgical
debridement. Since the patients are often immunocompromised, viral and bacterial secondary infections commonly
develop. Mortality rates vary depending on the site of the infection, the causative fungus, and other factors, but a
40
recent study found an overall mortality rate of 54%.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Compare the modes of transmission for coccidioidomycosis, blastomycosis, and mucormycosis.
• In general, which are more serious: the pulmonary or disseminated forms of these infections?
Aspergillosis
Aspergillus is a common filamentous fungus found in soils and organic debris. Nearly everyone has been exposed to
this mold, yet very few people become sick. In immunocompromised patients, however, Aspergillus may become
established and cause aspergillosis. Inhalation of spores can lead to asthma-like allergic reactions. The symptoms
commonly include shortness of breath, wheezing, coughing, runny nose, and headaches. Fungal balls, or
aspergilloma, can form when hyphal colonies collect in the lungs (Figure 22.26). The fungal hyphae can invade the
host tissues, leading to pulmonary hemorrhage and a bloody cough. In severe cases, the disease may progress to a
disseminated form that is often fatal. Death most often results from pneumonia or brain hemorrhages.
Laboratory diagnosis typically requires chest radiographs and a microscopic examination of tissue and respiratory
fluid samples. Serological tests are available to identify Aspergillus antigens. In addition, a skin test can be
performed to determine if the patient has been exposed to the fungus. This test is similar to the Mantoux tuberculin
skin test used for tuberculosis. Aspergillosis is treated with intravenous antifungal agents, including itraconazole
38 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Fungal Diseases. Definition of Mucormycosis.” 2015 http://www.cdc.gov/fungal/diseases/
mucormycosis/definition.html. Accessed July 7, 2016.
39 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Fungal Diseases. Symptoms of Mucormycosis.” 2015 http://www.cdc.gov/fungal/
diseases/mucormycosis/symptoms.html. Accessed July 7, 2016.
40 MM Roden et al. “Epidemiology and Outcome of Zygomycosis: A Review of 929 Reported Cases.” Clinical Infectious Diseases 41 no. 5
(2005):634–653.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 919 ===
22.4 • Respiratory Mycoses 905
and voriconazole. Allergic symptoms can be managed with corticosteroids because these drugs suppress the
immune system and reduce inflammation. However, in disseminated infections, corticosteroids must be
discontinued to allow a protective immune response to occur.
FIGURE 22.26 A fungal ball can be observed in the upper lobe of the right lung in this chest radiograph of a patient with aspergilloma.
(credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Pneumocystis Pneumonia
A type of pneumonia called Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) is caused by Pneumocystis jirovecii. Once thought to
be a protozoan, this organism was formerly named P. carinii but it has been reclassified as a fungus and renamed
based on biochemical and genetic analyses. Pneumocystis is a leading cause of pneumonia in patients with acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and can be seen in other compromised patients and premature infants.
Respiratory infection leads to fever, cough, and shortness of breath. Diagnosis of these infections can be difficult.
The organism is typically identified by microscopic examination of tissue and fluid samples from the lungs (Figure
22.27). A PCR-based test is available to detect P. jirovecii in asymptomatic patients with AIDS. The best treatment
for these infections is the combination drug trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMZ). These sulfa drugs often
have adverse effects, but the benefits outweigh these risks. Left untreated, PCP infections are often fatal.
FIGURE 22.27 A light micrograph of a smear containing Pneumocystis jirovecii (dark purple cells) obtained from human lung tissue and
stained with toluidine blue. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Cryptococcosis
Infection by the encapsulated yeast Cryptococcus neoformans causes cryptococcosis. This fungus is ubiquitous in
the soil and can be isolated from bird feces. Immunocompromised people are infected by inhaling basidiospores
found in aerosols. The thick polysaccharide capsule surrounding these microbes enables them to avoid clearance by
the alveolar macrophage. Initial symptoms of infection include fever, fatigue, and a dry cough. In
immunocompromised patients, pulmonary infections often disseminate to the brain. The resulting meningitis
=== PDF PAGE 920 ===
906 22 • Respiratory System Infections
produces headaches, sensitivity to light, and confusion. Left untreated, such infections are often fatal.
Cryptococcus infections are often diagnosed based on microscopic examination of lung tissues or cerebrospinal
fluids. India ink preparations (Figure 22.28) can be used to visualize the extensive capsules that surround the yeast
cells. Serological tests are also available to confirm the diagnosis. Amphotericin B, in combination with flucytosine,
is typically used for the initial treatment of pulmonary infections. Amphotericin B is a broad-spectrum antifungal
drug that targets fungal cell membranes. It can also adversely impact host cells and produce side effects. For this
reason, clinicians must carefully balance the risks and benefits of treatments in these patients. Because it is difficult
to eradicate cryptococcal infections, patients usually need to take fluconazole for up to 6 months after treatment
with amphotericin B and flucytosine to clear the fungus. Cryptococcal infections are more common in
immunocompromised people, such as those with AIDS. These patients typically require life-long suppressive
therapy to control this fungal infection.
FIGURE 22.28 (a) The micrograph shows stained budding Cryptococcus yeast cells from the lungs of a patient with AIDS. (b) The large
capsule of Cryptococcus neoformans is visible in this negative stain micrograph. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What populations are most at risk for developing Pneumocystis pneumonia or cryptococcosis?
• Why are these infections fatal if left untreated?
DISEASE PROFILE
Fungal Diseases of the Respiratory Tract
Most respiratory mycoses are caused by fungi that inhabit the environment. Such infections are generally
transmitted via inhalation of fungal spores and cannot be transmitted between humans. In addition, healthy
people are generally not susceptible to infection even when exposed; the fungi are only virulent enough to
establish infection in patients with HIV, AIDS, or another condition that compromises the immune defenses.
Figure 22.29 summarizes the features of important respiratory mycoses.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 921 ===
22.4 • Respiratory Mycoses 907
FIGURE 22.29
=== PDF PAGE 922 ===
908 22 • Summary
Summary
22.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the damage other parts of the body.
Respiratory Tract • Bacterial pneumonia results from infections that
cause inflammation and fluid accumulation in the
• The respiratory tract is divided into upper and
alveoli. It is most commonly caused by S.
lower regions at the epiglottis.
pneumoniae or H. influenzae. The former is
• Air enters the upper respiratory tract through the
commonly multidrug resistant.
nasal cavity and mouth, which both lead to the
• Mycoplasma pneumonia results from infection
pharynx. The lower respiratory tract extends
by Mycoplasma pneumoniae; it can spread
from the larynx into the trachea before
quickly, but the disease is mild and self-limiting.
branching into the bronchi, which divide further
• Chlamydial pneumonia can be caused by three
to form the bronchioles, which terminate in
pathogens that are obligate intracellular
alveoli, where gas exchange occurs.
parasites. Chlamydia pneumoniae is typically
• The upper respiratory tract is colonized by an
transmitted from an infected person, whereas C.
extensive and diverse normal microbiota, many
psittaci is typically transmitted from an infected
of which are potential pathogens. Few microbial
bird. Chlamydia trachomatis, may cause
inhabitants have been found in the lower
pneumonia in infants.
respiratory tract, and these may be transients.
• Several other bacteria can cause pneumonia in
• Members of the normal microbiota may cause
immunocompromised individuals and those with
opportunistic infections, using a variety of
cystic fibrosis.
strategies to overcome the innate nonspecific
• Tuberculosis is caused by Mycobacterium
defenses (including the mucociliary escalator)
tuberculosis. Infection leads to the production of
and adaptive specific defenses of the respiratory
protective tubercles in the alveoli and calcified
system.
Ghon complexes that can harbor the bacteria for
• Effective vaccines are available for many
a long time. Antibiotic-resistant forms are
common respiratory pathogens, both bacterial
common and treatment is typically long term.
and viral.
• Pertussis is caused by Bordetella pertussis.
• Most respiratory infections result in inflammation
Mucus accumulation in the lungs leads to
of the infected tissues; these conditions are given
prolonged severe coughing episodes (whooping
names ending in -itis, such as rhinitis, sinusitis,
cough) that facilitate transmission. Despite an
otitis, pharyngitis, and bronchitis.
available vaccine, outbreaks are still common.
22.2 Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory • Legionnaires disease is caused by infection from
Tract environmental reservoirs of the Legionella
pneumophila bacterium. The bacterium is
• A wide variety of bacteria can cause respiratory endocytic within macrophages and infection can
diseases; most are treatable with antibiotics or lead to pneumonia, particularly among
preventable with vaccines. immunocompromised individuals.
• Streptococcus pyogenes causes strep throat, an • Q fever is caused by Coxiella burnetii, whose
infection of the pharynx that also causes high primary hosts are domesticated mammals
fever and can lead to scarlet fever, acute (zoonotic disease). It causes pneumonia
rheumatic fever, and acute glomerulonephritis. primarily in farm workers and can lead to serious
• Acute otitis media is an infection of the middle complications, such as endocarditis.
ear that may be caused by several bacteria,
22.3 Viral Infections of the Respiratory Tract
including Streptococcus pneumoniae,
Haemophilus influenzae, and Moraxella
• Viruses cause respiratory tract infections more
catarrhalis. The infection can block the
frequently than bacteria, and most viral
eustachian tubes, leading to otitis media with
infections lead to mild symptoms.
effusion.
• The common cold can be caused by more than
• Diphtheria, caused by Corynebacterium
200 viruses, typically rhinoviruses,
diphtheriae, is now a rare disease because of
coronaviruses, and adenoviruses, transmitted by
widespread vaccination. The bacteria produce
direct contact, aerosols, or environmental
exotoxins that kill cells in the pharynx, leading to
surfaces.
the formation of a pseudomembrane; and
• Due to its ability to rapidly mutate through
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 923 ===
22 • Review Questions 909
antigenic drift and antigenic shift, influenza • Histoplasmosis is caused by a mold that grows
remains an important threat to human health. in soil rich in bird or bat droppings. Few exposed
Two new influenza vaccines are developed individuals become sick, but vulnerable
annually. individuals are susceptible. The yeast-like
• Several viral infections, including respiratory infectious cells grow inside phagocytes.
syncytial virus infections, which frequently • Coccidioidomycosis is also acquired from soil
occur in the very young, can begin with mild and, in some individuals, will cause lesions on
symptoms before progressing to viral the face. Extreme cases may infect other organs,
pneumonia. causing death.
• SARS and MERS are acute respiratory infections • Blastomycosis, a rare disease caused by a soil
caused by coronaviruses, and both appear to fungus, typically produces a mild lung infection
originate in animals. SARS has not been seen in but can become disseminated in the
the human population since 2004 but had a high immunocompromised. Systemic cases are fatal if
mortality rate during its outbreak. MERS also has untreated.
a high mortality rate and continues to appear in • Mucormycosis is a rare disease, caused by fungi
human populations. of the order Mucorales. It primarily affects
• Measles, rubella, and chickenpox are highly immunocompromised people. Infection involves
contagious, systemic infections that gain entry growth of the hyphae into infected tissues and
through the respiratory system and cause rashes can lead to death in some cases.
and fevers. Vaccines are available for all three. • Aspergillosis, caused by the common soil fungus
Measles is the most severe of the three and is Aspergillus, infects immunocompromised
responsible for significant mortality around the people. Hyphal balls may impede lung function
world. Chickenpox typically causes mild and hyphal growth into tissues can cause
infections in children but the virus can reactivate damage. Disseminated forms can lead to death.
to cause painful cases of shingles later in life. • Pneumocystis pneumonia is caused by the
fungus P. jirovecii. The disease is found in
22.4 Respiratory Mycoses
patients with AIDS and other
• Fungal pathogens rarely cause respiratory immunocompromised individuals. Sulfa drug
disease in healthy individuals, but inhalation of treatments have side effects, but untreated
fungal spores can cause severe pneumonia and cases may be fatal.
systemic infections in immunocompromised • Cryptococcosis is caused by Cryptococcus
patients. neoformans. Lung infections may move to the
• Antifungal drugs like amphotericin B can control brain, causing meningitis, which can be fatal.
most fungal respiratory infections.
Review Questions
Multiple Choice
1 . Which of the following is not directly connected A. pharynx → trachea → larynx → bronchi
to the nasopharynx? B. pharynx → larynx → trachea → bronchi
A. middle ear C. larynx → pharynx → bronchi → trachea
B. oropharynx D. larynx → pharynx → trachea → bronchi
C. lacrimal glands
D. nasal cavity 4 . The ___________ separates the upper and
lower respiratory tract.
2 . What type of cells produce the mucus for the A. bronchi
mucous membranes? B. larynx
A. goblet cells C. epiglottis
B. macrophages D. palatine tonsil
C. phagocytes
D. ciliated epithelial cells 5 . Which microbial virulence factor is most
important for attachment to host respiratory
3 . Which of these correctly orders the structures tissues?
through which air passes during inhalation?
=== PDF PAGE 924 ===
910 22 • Review Questions
A. adhesins 13 . What term refers to multinucleated cells that
B. lipopolysaccharide form when many host cells fuse together during
C. hyaluronidase infections?
D. capsules A. Ghon elements
B. Reye syndrome
6 . Which of the following does not involve a C. Koplik’s spots
bacterial exotoxin? D. syncytia
A. diphtheria
B. whooping cough 14 . Which of the following diseases is not associated
C. scarlet fever with coronavirus infections?
D. Q fever A. Middle East respiratory syndrome
B. German measles
7 . What disease is caused by Coxiella burnetii? C. the common cold
A. Q fever D. severe acute respiratory syndrome
B. tuberculosis
C. diphtheria 15 . Which of these viruses is responsible for causing
D. walking pneumonia shingles?
A. rubella virus
8 . In which stage of pertussis is the characteristic B. measles virus
whooping sound made? C. varicella-zoster virus
A. convalescence D. variola major virus
B. catarrhal
C. paroxysmal 16 . Which of these infections is also referred to as
D. prodromal Valley fever?
A. histoplasmosis
9 . What is the causative agent of Q fever? B. coccidioidomycosis
A. Coxiella burnetii C. blastomycosis
B. Chlamydia psittaci D. aspergillosis
C. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
D. Streptococcus pyogenes 17 . Which of the following is not caused by a
dimorphic fungus?
10 . Which of these microbes causes “walking A. histoplasmosis
pneumonia”? B. coccidioidomycosis
A. Klebsiella pneumoniae C. blastomycosis
B. Streptococcus pneumoniae D. aspergillosis
C. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
D. Chlamydia pneumoniae 18 . Which of the following is caused by infections by
bread molds?
11 . Which of the following viruses is not commonly A. mucormycosis
associated with the common cold? B. coccidioidomycosis
A. coronavirus C. cryptococcosis
B. adenovirus D. Pneumocystis pneumonia
C. rhinovirus
D. varicella-zoster virus 19 . In the United States, most histoplasmosis cases
occur
12 . Which of the following viral diseases has been A. in the Pacific northwest.
eliminated from the general population B. in the desert southwest.
worldwide? C. in the Mississippi river valley.
A. smallpox D. in Colorado river valley.
B. measles
C. German measles 20 . Which of the following infections can be
D. influenza diagnosed using a skin test similar to the
tuberculin test?
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 925 ===
22 • Review Questions 911
A. histoplasmosis C. blastomycosis
B. cryptococcosis D. aspergillosis
Fill in the Blank
21 . Unattached microbes are moved from the lungs 32 . A(n) _______ is an uncontrolled positive
to the epiglottis by the _______ effect. feedback loop between cytokines and
leucocytes.
22 . Many bacterial pathogens produce _______ to
evade phagocytosis. 33 . In cases of shingles, the antiviral drug _______
may be prescribed.
23 . The main type of antibody in the mucous
membrane defenses is _______. 34 . The slow accumulation of genetic changes to an
influenza virus over time is referred to as
24 . _______ results from an inflammation of the
_______.
“voice box.”
35 . The _______ vaccine is effective in controlling
25 . _______ phagocytize potential pathogens in the
both measles and rubella.
lower lung.
36 . In coccidioidomycosis, _______ containing
26 . Calcified lesions called _______ form in the
many endospores form in the lungs.
lungs of patients with TB.
37 . In cryptococcosis, the main fungal virulence
27 . An inflammation of the middle ear is called
factor is the _______, which helps the pathogen
_______.
avoid phagocytosis.
28 . The _______ is used to serologically identify
38 . In some mycoses, fungal balls called _______
Streptococcus pneumoniae isolates.
form in the lungs
29 . _______ is a zoonotic infection that can be
39 . Most US cases of coccidioidomycosis occur in
contracted by people who handle birds.
_______.
30 . The main virulence factor involved in scarlet
40 . Coccidioidomycosis may develop when
fever is the _______.
Coccidioides immitis _______ are inhaled.
31 . The _______ virus is responsible for causing
German measles.
Short Answer
41 . Explain why the lower respiratory tract is 46 . Since we all have experienced many colds in our
essentially sterile. lifetime, why are we not resistant to future
infections?
42 . Explain why pneumonia is often a life-
threatening disease. 47 . Which pulmonary fungal infection is most likely
to be confused with tuberculosis? How can we
43 . Name three bacteria that commonly cause
discriminate between these two types of
pneumonia. Which is the most common cause?
infection?
44 . How does smoking make an individual more
48 . Compare and contrast aspergillosis and
susceptible to infections?
mucormycosis.
45 . How does the diphtheria pathogen form a
pseudomembrane?
Critical Thinking
49 . Name each of the structures of the respiratory
tract shown, and state whether each has a
relatively large or small normal microbiota.
=== PDF PAGE 926 ===
912 22 • Review Questions
mucus is very dry and caked, unlike the moist,
more-fluid mucus of normal lungs. What effect
do you think that has on the lung’s defenses?
51 . Why do you think smokers are more likely to
suffer from respiratory tract infections?
52 . Why might β-lactam antibiotics be ineffective
against Mycoplasma pneumoniae infections?
53 . Why is proper antibiotic therapy especially
important for patients with tuberculosis?
54 . What role does the common cold have in the rise
of antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria in the
United States?
FIGURE 22.30 (credit: modification of work by National 55 . Why is it highly unlikely that influenza A virus will
Cancer Institute) ever be eradicated, like the smallpox virus?
56 . Why are fungal pulmonary infections rarely
50 . Cystic fibrosis causes, among other things,
transmissible from person to person?
excess mucus to be formed in the lungs. The
Access for free at openstax.org