=== PDF PAGE 963 ===
CHAPTER 24
Digestive System Infections
FIGURE 24.1 E. coli O157:H7 causes serious foodborne illness. Curli fibers (adhesive surface fibers that are part of the extracellular
matrix) help these bacteria adhere to surfaces and form biofilms. Pictured are two groups of cells, curli non-producing cells (left) and curli
producing cells (right). (credit left, right: modification of work by USDA)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
24.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Digestive System
24.2 Microbial Diseases of the Mouth and Oral Cavity
24.3 Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
24.4 Viral Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
24.5 Protozoan Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
24.6 Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
INTRODUCTION Gastrointestinal (GI) diseases are so common that, unfortunately, most people have had first-
hand experience with the unpleasant symptoms, such as diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal discomfort. The causes
of gastrointestinal illness can vary widely, but such diseases can be grouped into two categories: those caused by
infection (the growth of a pathogen in the GI tract) or intoxication (the presence of a microbial toxin in the GI tract).
Foodborne pathogens like Escherichia coli O157:H7 are among the most common sources of gastrointestinal
disease. Contaminated food and water have always posed a health risk for humans, but in today’s global economy,
outbreaks can occur on a much larger scale. E. coli O157:H7 is a potentially deadly strain of E. coli with a history of
contaminating meat and produce that are not properly processed. The source of an E. coli O157:H7 outbreak can be
difficult to trace, especially if the contaminated food is processed in a foreign country. Once the source is identified,
authorities may issue recalls of the contaminated food products, but by then there are typically numerous cases of
food poisoning, some of them fatal.
=== PDF PAGE 964 ===
950 24 • Digestive System Infections
24.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Digestive System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the major anatomical features of the human digestive system
• Describe the normal microbiota of various regions in the human digestive system
• Explain how microorganisms overcome the defenses of the digestive tract to cause infection or
intoxication
• Describe general signs and symptoms associated with infections of the digestive system
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 1
After a morning of playing outside, four-year-old Carli ran inside for lunch. After taking a bite of her fried egg, she
pushed it away and whined, “It’s too slimy, Mommy. I don’t want any more.” But her mother, in no mood for
games, curtly replied that if she wanted to go back outside she had better finish her lunch. Reluctantly, Carli
complied, trying hard not to gag as she choked down the runny egg.
That night, Carli woke up feeling nauseated. She cried for her parents and then began to vomit. Her parents tried
to comfort her, but she continued to vomit all night and began to have diarrhea and run a fever. By the morning,
her parents were very worried. They rushed her to the emergency room.
• What could have caused Carli’s signs and symptoms?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.
The human digestive system, or the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, begins with the mouth and ends with the anus. The
parts of the mouth include the teeth, the gums, the tongue, the oral vestibule (the space between the gums, lips,
and teeth), and the oral cavity proper (the space behind the teeth and gums). Other parts of the GI tract are the
pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, rectum, and anus (Figure 24.2). Accessory digestive
organs include the salivary glands, liver, gallbladder, spleen, and pancreas.
The digestive system contains normal microbiota, including archaea, bacteria, fungi, protists, and even viruses.
Because this microbiota is important for normal functioning of the digestive system, alterations to the microbiota by
antibiotics or diet can be harmful. Additionally, the introduction of pathogens to the GI tract can cause infections
and diseases. In this section, we will review the microbiota found in a healthy digestive tract and the general signs
and symptoms associated with oral and GI infections.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 965 ===
24.1 • Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Digestive System 951
FIGURE 24.2 The digestive system, or the gastrointestinal tract, includes all of the organs associated with the digestion of food.
Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Oral Cavity
Food enters the digestive tract through the mouth, where mechanical digestion (by chewing) and chemical digestion
(by enzymes in saliva) begin. Within the mouth are the tongue, teeth, and salivary glands, including the parotid,
sublingual, and submandibular glands (Figure 24.3). The salivary glands produce saliva, which lubricates food and
=== PDF PAGE 966 ===
952 24 • Digestive System Infections
contains digestive enzymes.
FIGURE 24.3 (a) When food enters the mouth, digestion begins. (b) Salivary glands are accessory digestive organs. (credit: modification of
work by National Cancer Institute)
The structure of a tooth (Figure 24.4) begins with the visible outer surface, called the crown, which has to be
extremely hard to withstand the force of biting and chewing. The crown is covered with enamel, which is the hardest
material in the body. Underneath the crown, a layer of relatively hard dentin extends into the root of the tooth
around the innermost pulp cavity, which includes the pulp chamber at the top of the tooth and pulp canal, or root
canal, located in the root. The pulp that fills the pulp cavity is rich in blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, connective
tissue, and nerves. The root of the tooth and some of the crown are covered with cementum, which works with the
periodontal ligament to anchor the tooth in place in the jaw bone. The soft tissues surrounding the teeth and bones
are called gums, or gingiva. The gingival space or gingival crevice is located between the gums and teeth.
FIGURE 24.4 The tooth has a visible crown with an outer layer of enamel, a layer of dentin, and an inner pulp. The root, hidden by the gums,
contains the pulp canal (root canal). (credit: modification of work by Bruce Blaus)
Microbes such as bacteria and archaea are abundant in the mouth and coat all of the surfaces of the oral cavity.
However, different structures, such as the teeth or cheeks, host unique communities of both aerobic and anaerobic
microbes. Some factors appear to work against making the mouth hospitable to certain microbes. For example,
chewing allows microbes to mix better with saliva so they can be swallowed or spit out more easily. Saliva also
contains enzymes, including lysozyme, which can damage microbial cells. Recall that lysozyme is part of the first
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 967 ===
24.1 • Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Digestive System 953
line of defense in the innate immune system and cleaves the β-(1,4) glycosidic linkages between N-
acetylglucosamine (NAG) and N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM) in bacterial peptidoglycan (see Chemical Defenses).
Additionally, fluids containing immunoglobulins and phagocytic cells are produced in the gingival spaces. Despite all
of these chemical and mechanical activities, the mouth supports a large microbial community.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What factors make the mouth inhospitable for certain microbes?
Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the GI Tract
As food leaves the oral cavity, it travels through the pharynx, or the back of the throat, and moves into the
esophagus, which carries the food from the pharynx to the stomach without adding any additional digestive
enzymes. The stomach produces mucus to protect its lining, as well as digestive enzymes and acid to break down
food. Partially digested food then leaves the stomach through the pyloric sphincter, reaching the first part of the
small intestine called the duodenum. Pancreatic juice, which includes enzymes and bicarbonate ions, is released
into the small intestine to neutralize the acidic material from the stomach and to assist in digestion. Bile, produced
by the liver but stored in the gallbladder, is also released into the small intestine to emulsify fats so that they can
travel in the watery environment of the small intestine. Digestion continues in the small intestine, where the majority
of nutrients contained in the food are absorbed. Simple columnar epithelial cells called enterocytes line the lumen
surface of the small intestinal folds called villi. Each enterocyte has smaller microvilli (cytoplasmic membrane
extensions) on the cellular apical surface that increase the surface area to allow more absorption of nutrients to
occur (Figure 24.5).
=== PDF PAGE 968 ===
954 24 • Digestive System Infections
FIGURE 24.5 (a) The structure of the wall of the small intestine allows for the majority of nutrient absorption in the body. (b) Villi are folds in
the surface of the small intestine. Microvilli are cytoplasmic extensions on individual cells that increase the surface area for absorption. (c)
A light micrograph shows the shape of the villi. (d) An electron micrograph shows the shape of the microvilli. (credit b, c, d: Modification of
micrographs provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Digested food leaves the small intestine and moves into the large intestine, or colon, where there is a more diverse
microbiota. Near this junction, there is a small pouch in the large intestine called the cecum, which attaches to the
appendix. Further digestion occurs throughout the colon and water is reabsorbed, then waste is excreted through
the rectum, the last section of the colon, and out of the body through the anus (Figure 24.2).
The environment of most of the GI tract is harsh, which serves two purposes: digestion and immunity. The stomach
is an extremely acidic environment (pH 1.5–3.5) due to the gastric juices that break down food and kill many
ingested microbes; this helps prevent infection from pathogens. The environment in the small intestine is less harsh
and is able to support microbial communities. Microorganisms present in the small intestine can include lactobacilli,
diptherioids and the fungus Candida. On the other hand, the large intestine (colon) contains a diverse and abundant
microbiota that is important for normal function. These microbes include Bacteriodetes (especially the genera
Bacteroides and Prevotella) and Firmicutes (especially members of the genus Clostridium). Methanogenic archaea
and some fungi are also present, among many other species of bacteria. These microbes all aid in digestion and
contribute to the production of feces, the waste excreted from the digestive tract, and flatus, the gas produced from
microbial fermentation of undigested food. They can also produce valuable nutrients. For example, lactic acid
bacteria such as bifidobacteria can synthesize vitamins, such as vitamin B12, folate, and riboflavin, that humans
cannot synthesize themselves. E. coli found in the intestine can also break down food and help the body produce
vitamin K, which is important for blood coagulation.
The GI tract has several other methods of reducing the risk of infection by pathogens. Small aggregates of
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 969 ===
24.1 • Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Digestive System 955
underlying lymphoid tissue in the ileum, called Peyer’s patches (Figure 24.5), detect pathogens in the intestines via
microfold (M) cells, which transfer antigens from the lumen of the intestine to the lymphocytes on Peyer’s patches
to induce an immune response. The Peyer’s patches then secrete IgA and other pathogen-specific antibodies into
the intestinal lumen to help keep intestinal microbes at safe levels. Goblet cells, which are modified simple
columnar epithelial cells, also line the GI tract (Figure 24.6). Goblet cells secrete a gel-forming mucin, which is the
major component of mucus. The production of a protective layer of mucus helps reduce the risk of pathogens
reaching deeper tissues.
The constant movement of materials through the gastrointestinal tract also helps to move transient pathogens out
of the body. In fact, feces are composed of approximately 25% microbes, 25% sloughed epithelial cells, 25%
mucus, and 25% digested or undigested food. Finally, the normal microbiota provides an additional barrier to
infection via a variety of mechanisms. For example, these organisms outcompete potential pathogens for space and
nutrients within the intestine. This is known as competitive exclusion. Members of the microbiota may also secrete
protein toxins known as bacteriocins that are able to bind to specific receptors on the surface of susceptible
bacteria.
FIGURE 24.6 A magnified image of intestinal villi in the GI tract shows goblet cells. These cells are important in producing a protective layer
of mucus.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Compare and contrast the microbiota of the small and large intestines.
General Signs and Symptoms of Oral and GI Disease
Despite numerous defense mechanisms that protect against infection, all parts of the digestive tract can become
sites of infection or intoxication. The term food poisoning is sometimes used as a catch-all for GI infections and
intoxications, but not all forms of GI disease originate with foodborne pathogens or toxins.
In the mouth, fermentation by anaerobic microbes produces acids that damage the teeth and gums. This can lead to
tooth decay, cavities, and periodontal disease, a condition characterized by chronic inflammation and erosion of
the gums. Additionally, some pathogens can cause infections of the mucosa, glands, and other structures in the
mouth, resulting in inflammation, sores, cankers, and other lesions. An open sore in the mouth or GI tract is typically
called an ulcer.
Infections and intoxications of the lower GI tract often produce symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
aches, and fever. In some cases, vomiting and diarrhea may cause severe dehydration and other complications that
can become serious or fatal. Various clinical terms are used to describe gastrointestinal symptoms. For example,
=== PDF PAGE 970 ===
956 24 • Digestive System Infections
gastritis is an inflammation of the stomach lining that results in swelling and enteritis refers to inflammation of the
intestinal mucosa. When the inflammation involves both the stomach lining and the intestinal lining, the condition is
called gastroenteritis. Inflammation of the liver is called hepatitis. Inflammation of the colon, called colitis,
commonly occurs in cases of food intoxication. Because an inflamed colon does not reabsorb water as effectively as
it normally does, stools become watery, causing diarrhea. Damage to the epithelial cells of the colon can also cause
bleeding and excess mucus to appear in watery stools, a condition called dysentery.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• List possible causes and signs and symptoms of food poisoning.
24.2 Microbial Diseases of the Mouth and Oral Cavity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the role of microbial activity in diseases of the mouth and oral cavity
• Compare the major characteristics of specific oral diseases and infections
Despite the presence of saliva and the mechanical forces of chewing and eating, some microbes thrive in the mouth.
These microbes can cause damage to the teeth and can cause infections that have the potential to spread beyond
the mouth and sometimes throughout the body.
Dental Caries
Cavities of the teeth, known clinically as dental caries, are microbial lesions that cause damage to the teeth. Over
time, the lesion can grow through the outer enamel layer to infect the underlying dentin or even the innermost pulp.
If dental caries are not treated, the infection can become an abscess that spreads to the deeper tissues of the teeth,
near the roots, or to the bloodstream.
Tooth decay results from the metabolic activity of microbes that live on the teeth. A layer of proteins and
carbohydrates forms when clean teeth come into contact with saliva. Microbes are attracted to this food source and
form a biofilm called plaque. The most important cariogenic species in these biofilms is Streptococcus mutans.
When sucrose, a disaccharide sugar from food, is broken down by bacteria in the mouth, glucose and fructose are
produced. The glucose is used to make dextran, which is part of the extracellular matrix of the biofilm. Fructose is
fermented, producing organic acids such as lactic acid. These acids dissolve the minerals of the tooth, including
enamel, even though it is the hardest material in the body. The acids work even more quickly on exposed dentin
(Figure 24.7). Over time, the plaque biofilm can become thick and eventually calcify. When a heavy plaque deposit
becomes hardened in this way, it is called tartar or dental calculus (Figure 24.8). These substantial plaque biofilms
can include a variety of bacterial species, including Streptococcus and Actinomyces species.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 971 ===
24.2 • Microbial Diseases of the Mouth and Oral Cavity 957
FIGURE 24.7 Tooth decay occurs in stages. When bacterial biofilms (plaque) develop on teeth, the acids produced gradually dissolve the
enamel, followed by the dentin. Eventually, if left untreated, the lesion may reach the pulp and cause an abscess. (credit: modification of
work by “BruceBlaus”/Wikimedia Commons)
FIGURE 24.8 (a) Tartar (dental calculus) is visible at the bases of these teeth. The darker deposits higher on the crowns are staining. (b)
This tooth shows only a small amount of visible decay. (c) An X-ray of the same tooth shows that there is a dark area representing more
decay inside the tooth. (d) Removal of a portion of the crown reveals the area of damage. (e) All of the cavity must be removed before filling.
(credit: modification of work by “DRosenbach”/Wikimedia Commons)
Some tooth decay is visible from the outside, but it is not always possible to see all decay or the extent of the decay.
X-ray imaging is used to produce radiographs that can be studied to look for deeper decay and damage to the root or
bone (Figure 24.8). If not detected, the decay can reach the pulp or even spread to the bloodstream. Painful
abscesses can develop.
To prevent tooth decay, prophylactic treatment and good hygiene are important. Regular tooth brushing and flossing
physically removes microbes and combats microbial growth and biofilm formation. Toothpaste contains fluoride,
=== PDF PAGE 972 ===
958 24 • Digestive System Infections
which becomes incorporated into the hydroxyapatite of tooth enamel, protecting it against acidity caused by
fermentation of mouth microbiota. Fluoride is also bacteriostatic, thus slowing enamel degradation. Antiseptic
mouthwashes commonly contain plant-derived phenolics like thymol and eucalyptol and/or heavy metals like zinc
chloride (see Using Chemicals to Control Microorganisms). Phenolics tend to be stable and persistent on surfaces,
and they act through denaturing proteins and disrupting membranes.
Regular dental cleanings allow for the detection of decay at early stages and the removal of tartar. They may also
help to draw attention to other concerns, such as damage to the enamel from acidic drinks. Reducing sugar
consumption may help prevent damage that results from the microbial fermentation of sugars. Additionally,
sugarless candies or gum with sugar alcohols (such as xylitol) can reduce the production of acids because these are
fermented to nonacidic compounds (although excess consumption may lead to gastrointestinal distress). Fluoride
treatment or ingesting fluoridated water strengthens the minerals in teeth and reduces the incidence of dental
caries.
If caries develop, prompt treatment prevents worsening. Smaller areas of decay can be drilled to remove affected
tissue and then filled. If the pulp is affected, then a root canal may be needed to completely remove the infected
tissues to avoid continued spread of the infection, which could lead to painful abscesses.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Name some ways that microbes contribute to tooth decay.
• What is the most important cariogenic species of bacteria?
Periodontal Disease
In addition to damage to the teeth themselves, the surrounding structures can be affected by microbes. Periodontal
disease is the result of infections that lead to inflammation and tissue damage in the structures surrounding the
teeth. The progression from mild to severe periodontal disease is generally reversible and preventable with good
oral hygiene.
Inflammation of the gums that can lead to irritation and bleeding is called gingivitis. When plaque accumulates on
the teeth, bacteria colonize the gingival space. As this space becomes increasingly blocked, the environment
becomes anaerobic. This allows a wide variety of microbes to colonize, including Porphyromonas, Streptococcus,
and Actinomyces. The bacterial products, which include lipopolysaccharide (LPS), proteases, lipoteichoic acids, and
others, cause inflammation and gum damage (Figure 24.9). It is possible that methanogenic archaeans (including
Methanobrevibacter oralis and other Methanobrevibacter species) also contribute to disease progression as some
123
species have been identified in patients with periodontal disease, but this has proven difficult to study.
Gingivitis is diagnosed by visual inspection, including measuring pockets in the gums, and X-rays, and is usually
treated using good dental hygiene and professional dental cleaning, with antibiotics reserved for severe cases.
FIGURE 24.9 Redness and irritation of the gums are evidence of gingivitis.
Over time, chronic gingivitis can develop into the more serious condition of periodontitis (Figure 24.10). When this
1 Hans-Peter Horz and Georg Conrads. “Methanogenic Archaea and Oral Infections—Ways to Unravel the Black Box.” Journal of Oral
Microbiology 3(2011). doi: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5940.
2 Hiroshi Maeda, Kimito Hirai, Junji Mineshiba, Tadashi Yamamoto, Susumu Kokeguchi, and Shogo Takashiba. “Medical Microbiological
Approach to Archaea in Oral Infectious Diseases.” Japanese Dental Science Review 49: 2, p. 72–78.
3 Paul W. Lepp, Mary M. Brinig, Cleber C. Ouverney, Katherine Palm, Gary C. Armitage, and David A. Relman. “Methanogenic Archaea and
Human Periodontal Disease.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101 (2003): 16, pp.
6176–6181. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0308766101.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 973 ===
24.2 • Microbial Diseases of the Mouth and Oral Cavity 959
happens, the gums recede and expose parts of the tooth below the crown. This newly exposed area is relatively
unprotected, so bacteria can grow on it and spread underneath the enamel of the crown and cause cavities. Bacteria
in the gingival space can also erode the cementum, which helps to hold the teeth in place. If not treated, erosion of
cementum can lead to the movement or loss of teeth. The bones of the jaw can even erode if the infection spreads.
This condition can be associated with bleeding and halitosis (bad breath). Cleaning and appropriate dental hygiene
may be sufficient to treat periodontitis. However, in cases of severe periodontitis, an antibiotic may be given.
Antibiotics may be given in pill form or applied directly to the gum (local treatment). Antibiotics given can include
tetracycline, doxycycline, macrolides or β-lactams. Because periodontitis can be caused by a mix of microbes, a
combination of antibiotics may be given.
FIGURE 24.10 (a) Healthy gums hold the teeth firmly and do not bleed. (b) Gingivitis is the first stage of periodontal disease. Microbial
infection causes gums to become inflamed and irritated, with occasional bleeding. (c) In periodontitis, gums recede and expose parts of the
tooth normally covered. (d) In advanced periodontitis, the infection spreads to ligaments and bone tissue supporting the teeth. Tooth loss
may occur, or teeth may need to be surgically removed. (credit: modification of work by “BruceBlaus”/Wikimedia Commons)
Trench Mouth
When certain bacteria, such as Prevotella intermedia, Fusobacterium species, and Treponema vicentii, are involved
and periodontal disease progresses, acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis or trench mouth, also called Vincent's
disease, can develop. This is severe periodontitis characterized by erosion of the gums, ulcers, substantial pain with
chewing, and halitosis (Figure 24.11) that can be diagnosed by visual examination and X-rays. In countries with
good medical and dental care, it is most common in individuals with weakened immune systems, such as patients
with AIDS. In addition to cleaning and pain medication, patients may be prescribed antibiotics such as amoxicillin,
amoxicillin clavulanate, clindamycin, or doxycycline.
=== PDF PAGE 974 ===
960 24 • Digestive System Infections
FIGURE 24.11 These inflamed, eroded gums are an example of a mild case of acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis, also known as trench
mouth. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How does gingivitis progress to periodontitis?
MICRO CONNECTIONS
Healthy Mouth, Healthy Body
Good oral health promotes good overall health, and the reverse is also true. Poor oral health can lead to difficulty
eating, which can cause malnutrition. Painful or loose teeth can also cause a person to avoid certain foods or eat
less. Malnutrition due to dental problems is of greatest concern for the elderly, for whom it can worsen other health
conditions and contribute to mortality. Individuals who have serious illnesses, especially AIDS, are also at increased
risk of malnutrition from dental problems.
Additionally, poor oral health can contribute to the development of disease. Increased bacterial growth in the mouth
can cause inflammation and infection in other parts of the body. For example, Streptococcus in the mouth, the main
contributor to biofilms on teeth, tartar, and dental caries, can spread throughout the body when there is damage to
the tissues inside the mouth, as can happen during dental work. S. mutans produces a surface adhesin known as P1,
which binds to salivary agglutinin on the surface of the tooth. P1 can also bind to extracellular matrix proteins
including fibronectin and collagen. When Streptococcus enters the bloodstream as a result of tooth brushing or
dental cleaning, it causes inflammation that can lead to the accumulation of plaque in the arteries and contribute to
the development of atherosclerosis, a condition associated with cardiovascular disease, heart attack, and stroke. In
some cases, bacteria that spread through the blood vessels can lodge in the heart and cause endocarditis (an
example of a focal infection).
Oral Infections
As noted earlier, normal oral microbiota can cause dental and periodontal infections. However, there are number of
other infections that can manifest in the oral cavity when other microbes are present.
Herpetic Gingivostomatitis
As described in Viral Infections of the Skin and Eyes, infections by herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) frequently
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 975 ===
24.2 • Microbial Diseases of the Mouth and Oral Cavity 961
manifest as oral herpes, also called acute herpes labialis and characterized by cold sores on the lips, mouth, or
gums. HSV-1 can also cause acute herpetic gingivostomatitis, a condition that results in ulcers of the mucous
membranes inside the mouth (Figure 24.12). Herpetic gingivostomatitis is normally self-limiting except in
immunocompromised patients. Like oral herpes, the infection is generally diagnosed through clinical examination,
but cultures or biopsies may be obtained if other signs or symptoms suggest the possibility of a different causative
agent. If treatment is needed, mouthwashes or antiviral medications such as acyclovir, famciclovir, or valacyclovir
may be used.
FIGURE 24.12 (a) This cold sore is caused by infection with herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1). (b) HSV-1 can also cause acute herpetic
gingivostomatitis. (credit b: modification of work by Klaus D. Peter)
Oral Thrush
The yeast Candida is part of the normal human microbiota, but overgrowths, especially of Candida albicans, can lead
to infections in several parts of the body. When Candida infection develops in the oral cavity, it is called oral thrush.
Oral thrush is most common in infants because they do not yet have well developed immune systems and have not
acquired the robust normal microbiota that keeps Candida in check in adults. Oral thrush is also common in
immunodeficient patients and is a common infection in patients with AIDS.
Oral thrush is characterized by the appearance of white patches and pseudomembranes in the mouth (Figure 24.13)
and can be associated with bleeding. The infection may be treated topically with nystatin or clotrimazole oral
suspensions, although systemic treatment is sometimes needed. In serious cases, systemic azoles such as
fluconazole or itraconazole (for strains resistant to fluconazole), may be used. Amphotericin B can also be used if
the infection is severe or if the Candida species is azole-resistant.
FIGURE 24.13 Overgrowth of Candida in the mouth is called thrush. It often appears as white patches. (credit: modification of work by
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
=== PDF PAGE 976 ===
962 24 • Digestive System Infections
Mumps
The viral disease mumps is an infection of the parotid glands, the largest of the three pairs of salivary glands (Figure
24.3). The causative agent is mumps virus (MuV), a paramyxovirus with an envelope that has hemagglutinin and
neuraminidase spikes. A fusion protein located on the surface of the envelope helps to fuse the viral envelope to the
host cell plasma membrane.
Mumps virus is transmitted through respiratory droplets or through contact with contaminated saliva, making it
quite contagious so that it can lead easily to epidemics. It causes fever, muscle pain, headache, pain with chewing,
loss of appetite, fatigue, and weakness. There is swelling of the salivary glands and associated pain (Figure 24.14).
The virus can enter the bloodstream (viremia), allowing it to spread to the organs and the central nervous system.
The infection ranges from subclinical cases to cases with serious complications, such as encephalitis, meningitis,
and deafness. Inflammation of the pancreas, testes, ovaries, and breasts may also occur and cause permanent
damage to those organs; despite these complications, a mumps infection rarely cause sterility.
Mumps can be recognized based on clinical signs and symptoms, and a diagnosis can be confirmed with laboratory
testing. The virus can be identified using culture or molecular techniques such as RT-PCR. Serologic tests are also
available, especially enzyme immunoassays that detect antibodies. There is no specific treatment for mumps, so
supportive therapies are used. The most effective way to avoid infection is through vaccination. Although mumps
used to be a common childhood disease, it is now rare in the United States due to vaccination with the measles,
mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine.
FIGURE 24.14 This child shows the characteristic parotid swelling associated with mumps. (credit: modification of work by Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Compare and contrast the signs and symptoms of herpetic gingivostomatitis, oral thrush, and mumps.
DISEASE PROFILE
Oral Infections
Infections of the mouth and oral cavity can be caused by a variety of pathogens, including bacteria, viruses, and
fungi. Many of these infections only affect the mouth, but some can spread and become systemic infections.
Figure 24.15 summarizes the main characteristics of common oral infections.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 977 ===
24.3 • Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 963
FIGURE 24.15
24.3 Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the most common bacteria that can cause infections of the GI tract
• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the GI tract
A wide range of gastrointestinal diseases are caused by bacterial contamination of food. Recall that foodborne
disease can arise from either infection or intoxication. In both cases, bacterial toxins are typically responsible for
producing disease signs and symptoms. The distinction lies in where the toxins are produced. In an infection, the
microbial agent is ingested, colonizes the gut, and then produces toxins that damage host cells. In an intoxication,
=== PDF PAGE 978 ===
964 24 • Digestive System Infections
bacteria produce toxins in the food before it is ingested. In either case, the toxins cause damage to the cells lining
the gastrointestinal tract, typically the colon. This leads to the common signs and symptoms of diarrhea or watery
stool and abdominal cramps, or the more severe dysentery. Symptoms of foodborne diseases also often include
nausea and vomiting, which are mechanisms the body uses to expel the toxic materials.
Most bacterial gastrointestinal illness is short-lived and self-limiting; however, loss of fluids due to severe diarrheal
illness can lead to dehydration that can, in some cases, be fatal without proper treatment. Oral rehydration therapy
with electrolyte solutions is an essential aspect of treatment for most patients with GI disease, especially in children
and infants.
Staphylococcal Food Poisoning
Staphylococcal food poisoning is one form of food intoxication. When Staphylococcus aureus grows in food, it may
produce enterotoxins that, when ingested, can cause symptoms such as nausea, diarrhea, cramping, and vomiting
within one to six hours. In some severe cases, it may cause headache, dehydration, and changes in blood pressure
and heart rate. Signs and symptoms resolve within 24 to 48 hours. S. aureus is often associated with a variety of raw
or undercooked and cooked foods including meat (e.g., canned meat, ham, and sausages) and dairy products (e.g.,
cheeses, milk, and butter). It is also commonly found on hands and can be transmitted to prepared foods through
poor hygiene, including poor handwashing and the use of contaminated food preparation surfaces, such as cutting
boards. The greatest risk is for food left at a temperature below 60 °C (140 °F), which allows the bacteria to grow.
Cooked foods should generally be reheated to at least 60 °C (140 °F) for safety and most raw meats should be
cooked to even higher internal temperatures (Figure 24.16).
FIGURE 24.16 This figure indicates safe internal temperatures associated with the refrigeration, cooking, and reheating of different foods.
Temperatures above refrigeration and below the minimum cooking temperature may allow for microbial growth, increasing the likelihood of
foodborne disease. (credit: modification of work by USDA)
There are at least 21 Staphylococcal enterotoxins and Staphylococcal enterotoxin-like toxins that can cause food
intoxication. The enterotoxins are proteins that are resistant to low pH, allowing them to pass through the stomach.
They are heat stable and are not destroyed by boiling at 100 °C. Even though the bacterium itself may be killed, the
enterotoxins alone can cause vomiting and diarrhea, although the mechanisms are not fully understood. At least
some of the symptoms may be caused by the enterotoxin functioning as a superantigen and provoking a strong
immune response by activating T cell proliferation.
The rapid onset of signs and symptoms helps to diagnose this foodborne illness. Because the bacterium does not
need to be present for the toxin to cause symptoms, diagnosis is confirmed by identifying the toxin in a food sample
or in biological specimens (feces or vomitus) from the patient. Serological techniques, including ELISA, can also be
used to identify the toxin in food samples.
The condition generally resolves relatively quickly, within 24 hours, without treatment. In some cases, supportive
treatment in a hospital may be needed.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 979 ===
24.3 • Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 965
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How can S. aureus cause food intoxication?
Shigellosis (Bacillary Dysentery)
When gastrointestinal illness is associated with the rod-shaped, gram-negative bacterium Shigella, it is called
bacillary dysentery, or shigellosis. Infections can be caused by S. dysenteriae, S. flexneri, S. boydii, and/or S.
sonnei that colonize the GI tract. Shigellosis can be spread from hand to mouth or through contaminated food and
water. Most commonly, it is transmitted through the fecal-oral route.
Shigella bacteria invade intestinal epithelial cells. When taken into a phagosome, they can escape and then live
within the cytoplasm of the cell or move to adjacent cells. As the organisms multiply, the epithelium and structures
with M cells of the Peyer’s patches in the intestine may become ulcerated and cause loss of fluid. Stomach cramps,
fever, and watery diarrhea that may also contain pus, mucus, and/or blood often develop. More severe cases may
result in ulceration of the mucosa, dehydration, and rectal bleeding. Additionally, patients may later develop
hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS), a serious condition in which damaged blood cells build up in the kidneys and
may cause kidney failure, or reactive arthritis, a condition in which arthritis develops in multiple joints following
infection. Patients may also develop chronic post-infection irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).
S. dysenteriae type 1 is able to produce Shiga toxin, which targets the endothelial cells of small blood vessels in the
small and large intestine by binding to a glycosphingolipid. Once inside the endothelial cells, the toxin targets the
large ribosomal subunit, thus affecting protein synthesis of these cells. Hemorrhaging and lesions in the colon can
result. The toxin can target the kidney’s glomerulus, the blood vessels where filtration of blood in the kidney begins,
thus resulting in HUS.
Stool samples, which should be processed promptly, are analyzed using serological or molecular techniques. One
common method is to perform immunoassays for S. dysenteriae. (Other methods that can be used to identify
Shigella include API test strips, Enterotube systems, or PCR testing. The presence of white blood cells and blood in
4
fecal samples occurs in about 70% of patients (Figure 24.17). Severe cases may require antibiotics such as
ciprofloxacin and azithromycin, but these must be carefully prescribed because resistance is increasingly common.
FIGURE 24.17 Red and white blood cells can be seen in this micrograph of a stool sample from a patient with shigellosis.
4 Jaya Sureshbabu. “Shigella Infection Workup.” Medscape. Updated Jun 28, 2016. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/
968773-workup.
=== PDF PAGE 980 ===
966 24 • Digestive System Infections
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Compare and contrast Shigella infections and intoxications.
Salmonellosis
Salmonella gastroenteritis, also called salmonellosis, is caused by the rod-shaped, gram-negative bacterium
Salmonella. Two species, S. enterica and S. bongori, cause disease in humans, but S. enterica is the most common.
The most common serotypes of S. enterica are Enteritidis and Typhi. We will discuss typhoid fever caused by
serotypes Typhi and Paratyphi A separately. Here, we will focus on salmonellosis caused by other serotypes.
Salmonella is a part of the normal intestinal microbiota of many individuals. However, salmonellosis is caused by
exogenous agents, and infection can occur depending on the serotype, size of the inoculum, and overall health of
the host. Infection is caused by ingestion of contaminated food, handling of eggshells, or exposure to certain
animals. Salmonella is part of poultry’s microbiota, so exposure to raw eggs and raw poultry can increase the risk of
infection. Handwashing and cooking foods thoroughly greatly reduce the risk of transmission. Salmonella bacteria
can survive freezing for extended periods but cannot survive high temperatures.
Once the bacteria are ingested, they multiply within the intestines and penetrate the epithelial mucosal cells via M
cells where they continue to grow (Figure 24.18). They trigger inflammatory processes and the hypersecretion of
fluids. Once inside the body, they can persist inside the phagosomes of macrophages. Salmonella can cross the
epithelial cell membrane and enter the bloodstream and lymphatic system. Some strains of Salmonella also
produce an enterotoxin that can cause an intoxication.
Infected individuals develop fever, nausea, abdominal cramps, vomiting, headache, and diarrhea. These signs and
symptoms generally last a few days to a week. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
5
there are 1,000,000 cases annually, with 380 deaths each year. However, because the disease is usually self-
limiting, many cases are not reported to doctors and the overall incidence may be underreported. Diagnosis involves
culture followed by serotyping and DNA fingerprinting if needed. Positive results are reported to the CDC. When an
unusual serotype is detected, samples are sent to the CDC for further analysis. Serotyping is important for
determining treatment. Oral rehydration therapy is commonly used. Antibiotics are only recommended for serious
cases. When antibiotics are needed, as in immunocompromised patients, fluoroquinolones, third-generation
cephalosporins, and ampicillin are recommended. Antibiotic resistance is a serious concern.
FIGURE 24.18 Salmonella entering an intestinal epithelial cell by reorganizing the host cell’s cytoskeleton via the trigger mechanism.
(credit: modification of work by National Institutes for Health)
5 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Salmonella. Updated August 25, 2016. https://www.cdc.gov/salmonella.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 981 ===
24.3 • Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 967
Typhoid Fever
Certain serotypes of S. enterica, primarily serotype Typhi (S. typhi) but also Paratyphi, cause a more severe type of
salmonellosis called typhoid fever. This serious illness, which has an untreated mortality rate of 10%, causes high
fever, body aches, headache, nausea, lethargy, and a possible rash.
Some individuals carry S. typhi without presenting signs or symptoms (known as asymptomatic carriers) and
continually shed them through their feces. These carriers often have the bacteria in the gallbladder or intestinal
epithelium. Individuals consuming food or water contaminated with these feces can become infected.
S. typhi penetrate the intestinal mucosa, grow within the macrophages, and are transported through the body, most
notably to the liver and gallbladder. Eventually, the macrophages lyse, releasing S. typhi into the bloodstream and
lymphatic system. Mortality can result from ulceration and perforation of the intestine. A wide range of
complications, such as pneumonia and jaundice, can occur with disseminated disease.
S. typhi have Salmonella pathogenicity islands (SPIs) that contain the genes for many of their virulence factors. Two
examples of important typhoid toxins are the Vi antigen, which encodes for capsule production, and chimeric A2B5
toxin, which causes many of the signs and symptoms of the acute phase of typhoid fever.
Clinical examination and culture are used to make the diagnosis. The bacteria can be cultured from feces, urine,
blood, or bone marrow. Serology, including ELISA, is used to identify the most pathogenic strains, but confirmation
with DNA testing or culture is needed. A PCR test can also be used, but is not widely available.
The recommended antibiotic treatment involves fluoroquinolones, ceftriaxone, and azithromycin. Individuals must
be extremely careful to avoid infecting others during treatment. Typhoid fever can be prevented through vaccination
for individuals traveling to parts of the world where it is common.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Why is serotyping particularly important in Salmonella infections and typhoid fever?
EYE ON ETHICS
Typhoid Mary
Mary Mallon was an Irish immigrant who worked as a cook in New York in the early 20th century. Over seven
years, from 1900 to 1907, Mallon worked for a number of different households, unknowingly spreading illness to
the people who lived in each one. In 1906, one family hired George Soper, an expert in typhoid fever epidemics,
to determine the cause of the illnesses in their household. Eventually, Soper tracked Mallon down and directly
linked 22 cases of typhoid fever to her. He discovered that Mallon was a carrier for typhoid but was immune to it
herself. Although active carriers had been recognized before, this was the first time that an asymptomatic carrier
of infection had been identified.
Because she herself had never been ill, Mallon found it difficult to believe she could be the source of the illness.
She fled from Soper and the authorities because she did not want to be quarantined or forced to give up her
profession, which was relatively well paid for someone with her background. However, Mallon was eventually
caught and kept in an isolation facility in the Bronx, where she remained until 1910, when the New York health
department released her under the condition that she never again work with food. Unfortunately, Mallon did not
comply, and she soon began working as a cook again. After new cases began to appear that resulted in the death
of two individuals, the authorities tracked her down again and returned her to isolation, where she remained for
23 more years until her death in 1938. Epidemiologists were able to trace 51 cases of typhoid fever and three
deaths directly to Mallon, who is unflatteringly remembered as “Typhoid Mary.”
=== PDF PAGE 982 ===
968 24 • Digestive System Infections
The Typhoid Mary case has direct correlations in the health-care industry. Consider Kaci Hickox, an American
nurse who treated Ebola patients in West Africa during the 2014 epidemic. After returning to the United States,
Hickox was quarantined against her will for three days and later found not to have Ebola. Hickox vehemently
6
opposed the quarantine. In an editorial published in the British newspaper The Guardian, Hickox argued that
quarantining asymptomatic health-care workers who had not tested positive for a disease would not only
prevent such individuals from practicing their profession, but discourage others from volunteering to work in
disease-ridden areas where health-care workers are desperately needed.
What is the responsibility of an individual like Mary Mallon to change her behavior to protect others? What
happens when an individual believes that she is not a risk, but others believe that she is? How would you react if
you were in Mallon’s shoes and were placed in a quarantine you did not believe was necessary, at the expense of
your own freedom and possibly your career? Would it matter if you were definitely infected or not?
E. coli Infections
The gram-negative rod Escherichia coli is a common member of the normal microbiota of the colon. Although the
vast majority of E. coli strains are helpful commensal bacteria, some can be pathogenic and may cause dangerous
diarrheal disease. The pathogenic strains have additional virulence factors such as type 1 fimbriae that promote
colonization of the colon or may produce toxins (see Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens). These
virulence factors are acquired through horizontal gene transfer.
Extraintestinal disease can result if the bacteria spread from the gastrointestinal tract. Although these bacteria can
be spread from person to person, they are often acquired through contaminated food or water. There are six
recognized pathogenic groups of E. coli, but we will focus here on the four that are most commonly transmitted
through food and water.
Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC), also known as traveler’s diarrhea, causes diarrheal illness and is common in less
developed countries. In Mexico, ETEC infection is called Montezuma’s Revenge. Following ingestion of contaminated
food or water, infected individuals develop a watery diarrhea, abdominal cramps, malaise (a feeling of being
unwell), and a low fever. ETEC produces a heat-stable enterotoxin similar to cholera toxin, and adhesins called
colonization factors that help the bacteria to attach to the intestinal wall. Some strains of ETEC also produce heat-
labile toxins. The disease is usually relatively mild and self-limiting. Diagnosis involves culturing and PCR. If needed,
antibiotic treatment with fluoroquinolones, doxycycline, rifaximin, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMZ)
may shorten infection duration. However, antibiotic resistance is a problem.
Enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) is very similar to shigellosis, including its pathogenesis of intracellular invasion into
intestinal epithelial tissue. This bacterium carries a large plasmid that is involved in epithelial cell penetration. The
illness is usually self-limiting, with symptoms including watery diarrhea, chills, cramps, malaise, fever, and
dysentery. Culturing and PCR testing can be used for diagnosis. Antibiotic treatment is not recommended, so
supportive therapy is used if needed.
Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) can cause a potentially fatal diarrhea, especially in infants and those in less
developed countries. Fever, vomiting, and diarrhea can lead to severe dehydration. These E. coli inject a protein (Tir)
that attaches to the surface of the intestinal epithelial cells and triggers rearrangement of host cell actin from
microvilli to pedestals. Tir also happens to be the receptor for Intimin, a surface protein produced by EPEC, thereby
allowing E. coli to “sit” on the pedestal. The genes necessary for this pedestal formation are encoded on the locus
for enterocyte effacement (LEE) pathogenicity island. As with ETEC, diagnosis involves culturing and PCR. Treatment
is similar to that for ETEC.
The most dangerous strains are enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), which are the strains capable of causing
epidemics. In particular, the strain O157:H7 has been responsible for several recent outbreaks. Recall that the O
and H refer to surface antigens that contribute to pathogenicity and trigger a host immune response (“O” refers to
the O-side chain of the lipopolysaccharide and the “H” refers to the flagella). Similar to EPEC, EHEC also forms
6 Kaci Hickox. “Stop Calling Me the ‘Ebola Nurse.’” The Guardian. November 17, 2014. http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/
2014/nov/17/stop-calling-me-ebola-nurse-kaci-hickox.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 983 ===
24.3 • Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 969
pedestals. EHEC also produces a Shiga-like toxin. Because the genome of this bacterium has been sequenced, it is
known that the Shiga toxin genes were most likely acquired through transduction (horizontal gene transfer). The
Shiga toxin genes originated from Shigella dysenteriae. Prophage from a bacteriophage that previously infected
Shigella integrated into the chromosome of E. coli. The Shiga-like toxin is often called verotoxin.
EHEC can cause disease ranging from relatively mild to life-threatening. Symptoms include bloody diarrhea with
severe cramping, but no fever. Although it is often self-limiting, it can lead to hemorrhagic colitis and profuse
bleeding. One possible complication is HUS. Diagnosis involves culture, often using MacConkey with sorbitol agar to
differentiate between E. coli O157:H7, which does not ferment sorbitol, and other less virulent strains of E. coli that
can ferment sorbitol.
Serological typing or PCR testing also can be used, as well as genetic testing for Shiga toxin. To distinguish EPEC
from EHEC, because they both form pedestals on intestinal epithelial cells, it is necessary to test for genes encoding
for both the Shiga-like toxin and for the LEE. Both EPEC and EHEC have LEE, but EPEC lacks the gene for Shiga toxin.
Antibiotic therapy is not recommended and may worsen HUS because of the toxins released when the bacteria are
killed, so supportive therapies must be used. Table 24.1 summarizes the characteristics of the four most common
pathogenic groups.
Some Pathogenic Groups of E. coli
Group Virulence Signs and Diagnostic Tests Treatment
Factors and Symptoms
Genes
Enterotoxigenic E. Heat stable Relatively Culturing, PCR Self-limiting; if
coli (ETEC) enterotoxin mild, watery needed,
similar to diarrhea fluoroquinolones,
cholera toxin doxycycline, rifaximin,
TMP/SMZ; antibiotic
resistance is a
problem
Enteroinvasive E. Inv (invasive Relatively Culturing, PCR; testing for inv Supportive therapy
coli (EIEC) plasmid) mild, watery gene; additional assays to only; antibiotics not
genes diarrhea; distinguish from Shigella recommended
dysentery or
inflammatory
colitis may
occur
TABLE 24.1
=== PDF PAGE 984 ===
970 24 • Digestive System Infections
Some Pathogenic Groups of E. coli
Group Virulence Signs and Diagnostic Tests Treatment
Factors and Symptoms
Genes
Enteropathogenic Locus of Severe fever, Culturing, PCR; detection of Self-limiting; if
E. coli (EPEC) enterocyte vomiting, LEE lacking Shiga-like toxin needed,
effacement nonbloody genes fluoroquinolones,
(LEE) diarrhea, doxycycline, rifaximin
pathogenicity dehydration; (TMP/SMZ); antibiotic
island potentially resistance is a
fatal problem
Enterohemorrhagic Verotoxin May be mild or Culturing; plate on Antibiotics are not
E. coli (EHEC) very severe; MacConkey agar with sorbitol recommended due to
bloody agar as it does not ferment the risk of HUS
diarrhea; may sorbitol; PCR detection of
result in HUS LEE containing Shiga-like
toxin genes
TABLE 24.1
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Compare and contrast the virulence factors and signs and symptoms of infections with the four main E. coli
groups.
Cholera and Other Vibrios
The gastrointestinal disease cholera is a serious infection often associated with poor sanitation, especially following
natural disasters, because it is spread through contaminated water and food that has not been heated to
temperatures high enough to kill the bacteria. It is caused by Vibrio cholerae serotype O1, a gram-negative,
flagellated bacterium in the shape of a curved rod (vibrio). According to the CDC, cholera causes an estimated 3 to 5
7
million cases and 100,000 deaths each year.
Because V. cholerae is killed by stomach acid, relatively large doses are needed for a few microbial cells to survive
to reach the intestines and cause infection. The motile cells travel through the mucous layer of the intestines, where
they attach to epithelial cells and release cholera enterotoxin. The toxin is an A-B toxin with activity through
adenylate cyclase (see Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens). Within the intestinal cell, cyclic AMP
(cAMP) levels increase, which activates a chloride channel and results in the release of ions into the intestinal
lumen. This increase in osmotic pressure in the lumen leads to water also entering the lumen. As the water and
electrolytes leave the body, it causes rapid dehydration and electrolyte imbalance. Diarrhea is so profuse that it is
often called “rice water stool,” and patients are placed on cots with a hole in them to monitor the fluid loss (Figure
24.19).
Cholera is diagnosed by taking a stool sample and culturing for Vibrio. The bacteria are oxidase positive and show
non-lactose fermentation on MacConkey agar. Gram-negative lactose fermenters will produce red colonies while
non-fermenters will produce white/colorless colonies. Gram-positive bacteria will not grow on MacConkey. Lactose
fermentation is commonly used for pathogen identification because the normal microbiota generally ferments
lactose while pathogens do not. V. cholerae may also be cultured on thiosulfate citrate bile salts sucrose (TCBS)
agar, a selective and differential media for Vibrio spp., which produce a distinct yellow colony.
7 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Cholera—Vibrio cholerae Infection. Updated November 6, 2014. http://www.cdc.gov/
cholera/general. Accessed Sept 14, 2016.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 985 ===
24.3 • Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 971
Cholera may be self-limiting and treatment involves rehydration and electrolyte replenishment. Although antibiotics
are not typically needed, they can be used for severe or disseminated disease. Tetracyclines are recommended, but
doxycycline, erythromycin, orfloxacin, ciprofloxacin, and TMP/SMZ may be used. Recent evidence suggests that
azithromycin is also a good first-line antibiotic. Good sanitation—including appropriate sewage treatment, clean
supplies for cooking, and purified drinking water—is important to prevent infection (Figure 24.19)
FIGURE 24.19 (a) Outbreaks of cholera often occur in areas with poor sanitation or after natural disasters that compromise sanitation
infrastructure. (b) At a cholera treatment center in Haiti, patients are receiving intravenous fluids to combat the dehydrating effects of this
disease. They often lie on a cot with a hole in it and a bucket underneath to allow for monitoring of fluid loss. (c) This scanning electron
micrograph shows Vibrio cholera. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit c: modification of
work by Janice Carr, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
V. cholera is not the only Vibrio species that can cause disease. V. parahemolyticus is associated with consumption
of contaminated seafood and causes gastrointestinal illness with signs and symptoms such as watery diarrhea,
nausea, fever, chills, and abdominal cramps. The bacteria produce a heat-stable hemolysin, leading to dysentery
and possible disseminated disease. It also sometimes causes wound infections. V. parahemolyticus is diagnosed
using cultures from blood, stool, or a wound. As with V. cholera, selective medium (especially TCBS agar) works
well. Tetracycline and ciprofloxacin can be used to treat severe cases, but antibiotics generally are not needed.
Vibrio vulnificus is found in warm seawater and, unlike V. cholerae, is not associated with poor sanitary conditions.
The bacteria can be found in raw seafood, and ingestion causes gastrointestinal illness. It can also be acquired by
individuals with open skin wounds who are exposed to water with high concentrations of the pathogen. In some
cases, the infection spreads to the bloodstream and causes septicemia. Skin infection can lead to edema,
ecchymosis (discoloration of skin due to bleeding), and abscesses. Patients with underlying disease have a high
fatality rate of about 50%. It is of particular concern for individuals with chronic liver disease or who are otherwise
immunodeficient because a healthy immune system can often prevent infection from developing. V. vulnificus is
diagnosed by culturing for the pathogen from stool samples, blood samples, or skin abscesses. Adult patients are
treated with doxycycline combined with a third generation cephalosporin or with fluoroquinolones, and children are
treated with TMP/SMZ.
Two other vibrios, Aeromonas hydrophila and Plesiomonas shigelloides, are also associated with marine
environments and raw seafood; they can also cause gastroenteritis. Like V. vulnificus, A. hydrophila is more often
associated with infections in wounds, generally those acquired in water. In some cases, it can also cause
septicemia. Other species of Aeromonas can cause illness. P. shigelloides is sometimes associated with more
serious systemic infections if ingested in contaminated food or water. Culture can be used to diagnose A. hydrophila
and P. shigelloides infections, for which antibiotic therapy is generally not needed. When necessary, tetracycline and
ciprofloxacin, among other antibiotics, may be used for treatment of A. hydrophila, and fluoroquinolones and
trimethoprim are the effective treatments for P. shigelloides.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How does V. cholera infection cause rapid dehydration?
Campylobacter jejuni Gastroenteritis
Campylobacter is a genus of gram-negative, spiral or curved bacteria. They may have one or two flagella.
=== PDF PAGE 986 ===
972 24 • Digestive System Infections
Campylobacter jejuni gastroenteritis, a form of campylobacteriosis, is a widespread illness that is caused by
Campylobacter jejuni. The primary route of transmission is through poultry that becomes contaminated during
slaughter. Handling of the raw chicken in turn contaminates cooking surfaces, utensils, and other foods.
Unpasteurized milk or contaminated water are also potential vehicles of transmission. In most cases, the illness is
self-limiting and includes fever, diarrhea, cramps, vomiting, and sometimes dysentery. More serious signs and
symptoms, such as bacteremia, meningitis, pancreatitis, cholecystitis, and hepatitis, sometimes occur. It has also
been associated with autoimmune conditions such as Guillain-Barré syndrome, a neurological disease that occurs
after some infections and results in temporary paralysis. HUS following infection can also occur. The virulence in
many strains is the result of hemolysin production and the presence of Campylobacter cytolethal distending toxin
(CDT), a powerful deoxyribonuclease (DNase) that irreversibly damages host cell DNA.
Diagnosis involves culture under special conditions, such as elevated temperature, low oxygen tension, and often
medium supplemented with antimicrobial agents. These bacteria should be cultured on selective medium (such as
Campy CV, charcoal selective medium, or cefaperazone charcoal deoxycholate agar) and incubated under
microaerophilic conditions for at least 72 hours at 42 °C. Antibiotic treatment is not usually needed, but
erythromycin or ciprofloxacin may be used.
Peptic Ulcers
The gram-negative bacterium Helicobacter pylori is able to tolerate the acidic environment of the human stomach
and has been shown to be a major cause of peptic ulcers, which are ulcers of the stomach or duodenum. The
bacterium is also associated with increased risk of stomach cancer (Figure 24.20). According to the CDC,
approximately two-thirds of the population is infected with H. pylori, but less than 20% have a risk of developing
ulcers or stomach cancer. H. pylori is found in approximately 80% of stomach ulcers and in over 90% of duodenal
8
ulcers.
H. pylori colonizes epithelial cells in the stomach using pili for adhesion. These bacteria produce urease, which
stimulates an immune response and creates ammonia that neutralizes stomach acids to provide a more hospitable
microenvironment. The infection damages the cells of the stomach lining, including those that normally produce the
protective mucus that serves as a barrier between the tissue and stomach acid. As a result, inflammation (gastritis)
occurs and ulcers may slowly develop. Ulcer formation can also be caused by toxin activity. It has been reported
9
that 50% of clinical isolates of H. pylori have detectable levels of exotoxin activity in vitro. This toxin, VacA, induces
vacuole formation in host cells. VacA has no primary sequence homology with other bacterial toxins, and in a mouse
model, there is a correlation between the presence of the toxin gene, the activity of the toxin, and gastric epithelial
tissue damage.
Signs and symptoms include nausea, lack of appetite, bloating, burping, and weight loss. Bleeding ulcers may
produce dark stools. If no treatment is provided, the ulcers can become deeper, more tissues can be involved, and
stomach perforation can occur. Because perforation allows digestive enzymes and acid to leak into the body, it is a
very serious condition.
8 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Helicobacter pylori: Fact Sheet for Health Care Providers.” Updated July 1998.
http://www.cdc.gov/ulcer/files/hpfacts.pdf.
9 T. L. Cover. “The Vacuolating Cytotoxin of Helicobacter pylori.” Molecular Microbiology 20 (1996) 2: pp. 241–246.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8733223.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 987 ===
24.3 • Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 973
FIGURE 24.20 Helicobacter infection decreases mucus production and causes peptic ulcers. (credit top left photo: modification of work by
"Santhosh Thomas"/YouTube; credit top right photo: modification of work by Moriya M, Uehara A, Okumura T, Miyamoto M, and Kohgo Y)
To diagnose H. pylori infection, multiple methods are available. In a breath test, the patient swallows radiolabeled
urea. If H. pylori is present, the bacteria will produce urease to break down the urea. This reaction produces
radiolabeled carbon dioxide that can be detected in the patient’s breath. Blood testing can also be used to detect
antibodies to H. pylori. The bacteria themselves can be detected using either a stool test or a stomach wall biopsy.
Antibiotics can be used to treat the infection. However, unique to H. pylori, the recommendation from the US Food
and Drug Administration is to use a triple therapy. The current protocols are 10 days of treatment with omeprazole,
amoxicillin, and clarithromycin (OAC); 14 days of treatment with bismuth subsalicylate, metronidazole, and
tetracycline (BMT); or 10 or 14 days of treatment with lansoprazole, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin (LAC).
Omeprazole, bismuth subsalicylate, and lansoprazole are not antibiotics but are instead used to decrease acid levels
because H. pylori prefers acidic environments.
Although treatment is often valuable, there are also risks to H. pylori eradication. Infection with H. pylori may
actually protect against some cancers, such as esophageal adenocarcinoma and gastroesophageal reflux
1011
disease.
10 Martin J. Blaser. “Disappearing Microbiota: Helicobacter pylori Protection against Esophageal Adenocarcinoma.” Cancer Prevention
=== PDF PAGE 988 ===
974 24 • Digestive System Infections
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How does H. pylori cause peptic ulcers?
Clostridium perfringens Gastroenteritis
Clostridium perfringens gastroenteritis is a generally mild foodborne disease that is associated with undercooked
meats and other foods. C. perfringens is a gram-positive, rod-shaped, endospore-forming anaerobic bacterium that
is tolerant of high and low temperatures. At high temperatures, the bacteria can form endospores that will
germinate rapidly in foods or within the intestine. Food poisoning by type A strains is common. This strain always
produces an enterotoxin, sometimes also present in other strains, that causes the clinical symptoms of cramps and
diarrhea. A more severe form of the illness, called pig-bel or enteritis necroticans, causes hemorrhaging, pain,
vomiting, and bloating. Gangrene of the intestines may result. This form has a high mortality rate but is rare in the
United States.
Diagnosis involves detecting the C. perfringens toxin in stool samples using either molecular biology techniques
(PCR detection of the toxin gene) or immunology techniques (ELISA). The bacteria itself may also be detected in
foods or in fecal samples. Treatment includes rehydration therapy, electrolyte replacement, and intravenous fluids.
Antibiotics are not recommended because they can damage the balance of the microbiota in the gut, and there are
concerns about antibiotic resistance. The illness can be prevented through proper handling and cooking of foods,
including prompt refrigeration at sufficiently low temperatures and cooking food to a sufficiently high temperature.
Clostridioides difficile
Clostridioides difficile is a gram-positive rod that can be a commensal bacterium as part of the normal microbiota of
healthy individuals. When the normal microbiota is disrupted by long-term antibiotic use, it can allow the
overgrowth of this bacterium, resulting in antibiotic-associated diarrhea caused by C. difficile. Antibiotic-
associated diarrhea can also be considered a nosocomial disease. Patients at the greatest risk of C. difficile infection
are those who are immunocompromised, have been in health-care settings for extended periods, are older, have
recently taken antibiotics, have had gastrointestinal procedures done, or use proton pump inhibitors, which reduce
stomach acidity and allow proliferation of C. difficile. Because this species can form endospores, it can survive for
extended periods of time in the environment under harsh conditions and is a considerable concern in health-care
settings.
This bacterium produces two toxins, Clostridioides difficile toxin A (TcdA) and Clostridioides difficile toxin B (TcdB).
These toxins inactivate small GTP-binding proteins, resulting in actin condensation and cell rounding, followed by
cell death. Infections begin with focal necrosis, then ulceration with exudate, and can progress to
pseudomembranous colitis, which involves inflammation of the colon and the development of a pseudomembrane
of fibrin containing dead epithelial cells and leukocytes (Figure 24.21). Watery diarrhea, dehydration, fever, loss of
appetite, and abdominal pain can result. Perforation of the colon can occur, leading to septicemia, shock, and death.
C. difficile is also associated with necrotizing enterocolitis in premature babies and neutropenic enterocolitis
associated with cancer therapies.
Research 1 (2008) 5: pp. 308–311. http://cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org/content/1/5/308.full.pdf+html.
11 Ivan F. N. Hung and Benjamin C. Y. Wong. “Assessing the Risks and Benefits of Treating Helicobacter pylori Infection.” Therapeutic
Advances in Gastroenterology 2 (2009) 3: pp, 141–147. doi: 10.1177/1756283X08100279.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 989 ===
24.3 • Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 975
FIGURE 24.21 Clostridioides difficile is able to colonize the mucous membrane of the colon when the normal microbiota is disrupted. The
toxins TcdA and TcdB trigger an immune response, with neutrophils and monocytes migrating from the bloodstream to the site of infection.
Over time, inflammation and dead cells contribute to the development of a pseudomembrane. (credit micrograph: modification of work by
Janice Carr, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Diagnosis is made by considering the patient history (such as exposure to antibiotics), clinical presentation, imaging,
endoscopy, lab tests, and other available data. Detecting the toxin in stool samples is used to confirm diagnosis.
Although culture is preferred, it is rarely practical in clinical practice because the bacterium is an obligate anaerobe.
Nucleic acid amplification tests, including PCR, are considered preferable to ELISA testing for molecular analysis.
The first step of conventional treatment is to stop antibiotic use, and then to provide supportive therapy with
electrolyte replacement and fluids. Metronidazole is the preferred treatment if the C. difficile diagnosis has been
confirmed. Vancomycin can also be used, but it should be reserved for patients for whom metronidazole was
ineffective or who meet other criteria (e.g., under 10 years of age, pregnant, or allergic to metronidazole).
A newer approach to treatment, known as a fecal transplant, focuses on restoring the microbiota of the gut in order
to combat the infection. In this procedure, a healthy individual donates a stool sample, which is mixed with saline
and transplanted to the recipient via colonoscopy, endoscopy, sigmoidoscopy, or enema. It has been reported that
12
this procedure has greater than 90% success in resolving C. difficile infections.
=== PDF PAGE 990 ===
976 24 • Digestive System Infections
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How does antibiotic use lead to C. difficile infections?
Foodborne Illness Due to Bacillus cereus
Bacillus cereus, commonly found in soil, is a gram-positive endospore-forming bacterium that can sometimes cause
foodborne illness. B. cereus endospores can survive cooking and produce enterotoxins in food after it has been
heated; illnesses often occur after eating rice and other prepared foods left at room temperature for too long. The
signs and symptoms appear within a few hours of ingestion and include nausea, pain, and abdominal cramps. B.
cereus produces two toxins: one causing diarrhea, and the other causing vomiting. More severe signs and symptoms
can sometimes develop.
Diagnosis can be accomplished by isolating bacteria from stool samples or vomitus and uneaten infected food.
Treatment involves rehydration and supportive therapy. Antibiotics are not typically needed, as the illness is usually
relatively mild and is due to toxin activity.
Foodborne Illness Due to Yersinia
The genus Yersinia is best known for Yersinia pestis, a gram-negative rod that causes the plague. However, Y.
enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis can cause gastroenteritis. The infection is generally transmitted through
the fecal-oral route, with ingestion of food or water that has been contaminated by feces. Intoxication can also
result because of the activity of its endotoxin and exotoxins (enterotoxin and cytotoxin necrotizing factor). The
illness is normally relatively mild and self-limiting. However, severe diarrhea and dysentery can develop in infants.
In adults, the infection can spread and cause complications such as reactive arthritis, thyroid disorders,
endocarditis, glomerulonephritis, eye inflammation, and/or erythema nodosum. Bacteremia may develop in rare
cases.
Diagnosis is generally made by detecting the bacteria in stool samples. Samples may also be obtained from other
tissues or body fluids. Treatment is usually supportive, including rehydration, without antibiotics. If bacteremia or
other systemic disease is present, then antibiotics such as fluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, doxycycline, and
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole may be used. Recovery can take up to two weeks.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Compare and contrast foodborne illnesses due to B. cereus and Yersinia.
DISEASE PROFILE
Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
Bacterial infections of the gastrointestinal tract generally occur when bacteria or bacterial toxins are ingested in
contaminated food or water. Toxins and other virulence factors can produce gastrointestinal inflammation and
general symptoms such as diarrhea and vomiting. Bacterial GI infections can vary widely in terms of severity and
treatment. Some can be treated with antibiotics, but in other cases antibiotics may be ineffective in combating
toxins or even counterproductive if they compromise the GI microbiota. Figure 24.22 and Figure 24.23 the key
features of common bacterial GI infections.
12 Faith Rohlke and Neil Stollman. “Fecal Microbiota Transplantation in Relapsing Clostridioides difficile Infection,” Therapeutic Advances
in Gastroenterology 5 (2012) 6: 403–420. doi: 10.1177/1756283X12453637.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 991 ===
24.3 • Bacterial Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 977
FIGURE 24.22
=== PDF PAGE 992 ===
978 24 • Digestive System Infections
FIGURE 24.23
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 2
At the hospital, Carli’s doctor began to think about possible causes of her severe gastrointestinal distress. One
possibility was food poisoning, but no one else in her family was sick. The doctor asked about what Carli had
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 993 ===
24.4 • Viral Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 979
eaten the previous day; her mother mentioned that she’d had eggs for lunch, and that they may have been a
little undercooked. The doctor took a sample of Carli’s stool and sent it for laboratory testing as part of her
workup. She suspected that Carli could have a case of bacterial or viral gastroenteritis, but she needed to know
the cause in order to prescribe an appropriate treatment.
In the laboratory, technicians microscopically identified gram-negative bacilli in Carli’s stool sample. They also
established a pure culture of the bacteria and analyzed it for antigens. This testing showed that the causative
agent was Salmonella.
• What should the doctor do now to treat Carli?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
24.4 Viral Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the most common viruses that can cause infections of the GI tract
• Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the GI tract and liver
13
In the developing world, acute viral gastroenteritis is devastating and a leading cause of death for children.
Worldwide, diarrhea is the second leading cause of mortality for children under age five, and 70% of childhood
14
gastroenteritis is viral. As discussed, there are a number of bacteria responsible for diarrhea, but viruses can also
cause diarrhea. E. coli and rotavirus are the most common causative agents in the developing world. In this section,
we will discuss rotaviruses and other, less common viruses that can also cause gastrointestinal illnesses.
Gastroenteritis Caused by Rotaviruses
Rotaviruses are double-stranded RNA viruses in the family Reoviridae. They are responsible for common diarrheal
illness, although prevention through vaccination is becoming more common. The virus is primarily spread by the
fecal-oral route (Figure 24.24).
FIGURE 24.24 Rotaviruses in a fecal sample are visualized using electron microscopy. (credit: Dr. Graham Beards)
13 Caleb K. King, Roger Glass, Joseph S. Bresee, Christopher Duggan. “Managing Acute Gastroenteritis Among Children: Oral Rehydration,
Maintenance, and Nutritional Therapy.” MMWR 52 (2003) RR16: pp. 1–16. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5216a1.htm.
14 Elizabeth Jane Elliott. “Acute Gastroenteritis in Children.” British Medical Journal 334 (2007) 7583: 35–40, doi: 10.1136/
bmj.39036.406169.80; S. Ramani and G. Kang. “Viruses Causing Diarrhoea in the Developing World.” Current Opinions in Infectious
Diseases 22 (2009) 5: pp. 477–482. doi: 10.1097/QCO.0b013e328330662f; Michael Vincent F Tablang. “Viral Gastroenteritis.” Medscape.
http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/176515-overview.
=== PDF PAGE 994 ===
980 24 • Digestive System Infections
These viruses are widespread in children, especially in day-care centers. The CDC estimates that 95% of children in
15
the United States have had at least one rotavirus infection by the time they reach age five. Due to the memory of
the body’s immune system, adults who come into contact with rotavirus will not contract the infection or, if they do,
are asymptomatic. The elderly, however, are vulnerable to rotavirus infection due to weakening of the immune
system with age, so infections can spread through nursing homes and similar facilities. In these cases, the infection
may be transmitted from a family member who may have subclinical or clinical disease. The virus can also be
transmitted from contaminated surfaces, on which it can survive for some time.
Infected individuals exhibit fever, vomiting, and diarrhea. The virus can survive in the stomach following a meal, but
is normally found in the small intestines, particularly the epithelial cells on the villi. Infection can cause food
intolerance, especially with respect to lactose. The illness generally appears after an incubation period of about two
days and lasts for approximately one week (three to eight days). Without supportive treatment, the illness can cause
severe fluid loss, dehydration, and even death. Even with milder illness, repeated infections can potentially lead to
malnutrition, especially in developing countries, where rotavirus infection is common due to poor sanitation and lack
of access to clean drinking water. Patients (especially children) who are malnourished after an episode of diarrhea
are more susceptible to future diarrheal illness, increasing their risk of death from rotavirus infection.
The most common clinical tool for diagnosis is enzyme immunoassay, which detects the virus from fecal samples.
Latex agglutination assays are also used. Additionally, the virus can be detected using electron microscopy and RT-
PCR.
Treatment is supportive with oral rehydration therapy. Preventive vaccination is also available. In the United States,
rotavirus vaccines are part of the standard vaccine schedule and administration follows the guidelines of the World
Health Organization (WHO). The WHO recommends that all infants worldwide receive the rotavirus vaccine, the first
16
dose between six and 15 weeks of age and the second before 32 weeks.
Gastroenteritis Caused by Noroviruses
Noroviruses, commonly identified as Norwalk viruses, are caliciviruses. Several strains can cause gastroenteritis.
There are millions of cases a year, predominately in infants, young children, and the elderly. These viruses are easily
transmitted and highly contagious. They are known for causing widespread infections in groups of people in
confined spaces, such as on cruise ships. The viruses can be transmitted through direct contact, through touching
contaminated surfaces, and through contaminated food. Because the virus is not killed by disinfectants used at
standard concentrations for killing bacteria, the risk of transmission remains high, even after cleaning.
The signs and symptoms of norovirus infection are similar to those for rotavirus, with watery diarrhea, mild cramps,
and fever. Additionally, these viruses sometimes cause projectile vomiting. The illness is usually relatively mild,
develops 12 to 48 hours after exposure, and clears within a couple of days without treatment. However, dehydration
may occur.
Norovirus can be detected using PCR or enzyme immunoassay (EIA) testing. RT-qPCR is the preferred approach as
EIA is insufficiently sensitive. If EIA is used for rapid testing, diagnosis should be confirmed using PCR. No
medications are available, but the illness is usually self-limiting. Rehydration therapy and electrolyte replacement
may be used. Good hygiene, hand washing, and careful food preparation reduce the risk of infection.
Gastroenteritis Caused by Astroviruses
Astroviruses are single-stranded RNA viruses (family Astroviridae) that can cause severe gastroenteritis, especially
in infants and children. Signs and symptoms include diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, fever, abdominal pain, headache,
and malaise. The viruses are transmitted through the fecal-oral route (contaminated food or water). For diagnosis,
stool samples are analyzed. Testing may involve enzyme immunoassays and immune electron microscopy.
Treatment involves supportive rehydration and electrolyte replacement if needed.
15 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Rotavirus,” The Pink Book. Updated September 8, 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/
pubs/pinkbook/rota.html.
16 World Health Organization. “Rotavirus.” Immunization, Vaccines, and Biologicals. Updated April 21, 2010. http://www.who.int/
immunization/topics/rotavirus/en/.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 995 ===
24.4 • Viral Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 981
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Why are rotaviruses, noroviruses, and astroviruses more common in children?
DISEASE PROFILE
Viral Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
A number of viruses can cause gastroenteritis, characterized by inflammation of the GI tract and other signs and
symptoms with a range of severities. As with bacterial GI infections, some cases can be relatively mild and self-
limiting, while others can become serious and require intensive treatment. Antimicrobial drugs are generally not
used to treat viral gastroenteritis; generally, these illnesses can be treated effectively with rehydration therapy
to replace fluids lost in bouts of diarrhea and vomiting. Because most viral causes of gastroenteritis are quite
contagious, the best preventive measures involve avoiding and/or isolating infected individuals and limiting
transmission through good hygiene and sanitation.
FIGURE 24.25
Hepatitis
Hepatitis is a general term meaning inflammation of the liver, which can have a variety of causes. In some cases, the
cause is viral infection. There are five main hepatitis viruses that are clinically significant: hepatitisviruses A (HAV), B
(HBV), C (HCV), D, (HDV) and E (HEV) (Figure 24.26). Note that other viruses, such as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV),
yellow fever, and cytomegalovirus (CMV) can also cause hepatitis and are discussed in Viral Infections of the
Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems.
FIGURE 24.26 Five main types of viruses cause hepatitis. HAV is a non-enveloped ssRNA(+) virus and is a member of the picornavirus
=== PDF PAGE 996 ===
982 24 • Digestive System Infections
family (Baltimore Group IV). HBV is a dsDNA enveloped virus, replicates using reverse transcriptase, and is a member of the hepadnavirus
family (Baltimore Group VII). HCV is an enveloped ssRNA(+) virus and is a member of the flavivirus family (Baltimore Group IV). HDV is an
enveloped ssRNA(–) that is circular (Baltimore Group V). This virus can only propagate in the presence of HBV. HEV is a non-enveloped
ssRNA(+) virus and a member of the hepeviridae family (Baltimore Group IV).
Although the five hepatitis viruses differ, they can cause some similar signs and symptoms because they all have an
affinity for hepatocytes (liver cells). HAV and HEV can be contracted through ingestion while HBV, HCV, and HDV are
transmitted by parenteral contact. It is possible for individuals to become long term or chronic carriers of hepatitis
viruses.
The virus enters the blood (viremia), spreading to the spleen, the kidneys, and the liver. During viral replication, the
virus infects hepatocytes. The inflammation is caused by the hepatocytes replicating and releasing more hepatitis
virus. Signs and symptoms include malaise, anorexia, loss of appetite, dark urine, pain in the upper right quadrant of
the abdomen, vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, joint pain, and gray stool. Additionally, when the liver is diseased or
injured, it is unable to break down hemoglobin effectively, and bilirubin can build up in the body, giving the skin and
mucous membranes a yellowish color, a condition called jaundice (Figure 24.27). In severe cases, death from liver
necrosis may occur.
FIGURE 24.27 (a) Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver resulting from a variety of root causes. It can cause jaundice. (b) Jaundice is
characterized by yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes, and sclera of the eyes. (credit b left: modification of work by James Heilman,
MD; credit b right: modification of work by “Sab3el3eish”/Wikimedia Commons)
Despite having many similarities, each of the hepatitis viruses has its own unique characteristics. HAV is generally
transmitted through the fecal-oral route, close personal contact, or exposure to contaminated water or food.
Hepatitis A can develop after an incubation period of 15 to 50 days (the mean is 30). It is normally mild or even
asymptomatic and is usually self-limiting within weeks to months. A more severe form, fulminant hepatitis, rarely
occurs but has a high fatality rate of 70–80%. Vaccination is available and is recommended especially for children
(between ages one and two), those traveling to countries with higher risk, those with liver disease and certain other
conditions, and drug users.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 997 ===
24.4 • Viral Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 983
Although HBV is associated with similar signs and symptoms, transmission and outcomes differ. This virus has a
mean incubation period of 120 days and is generally associated with exposure to infectious blood or body fluids
such as semen or saliva. Exposure can occur through skin puncture, across the placenta, or through mucosal
contact, but it is not spread through casual contact such as hugging, hand holding, sneezing, or coughing, or even
through breastfeeding or kissing. Risk of infection is greatest for those who use intravenous drugs or who have
sexual contact with an infected individual. Health-care workers are also at risk from needle sticks and other injuries
when treating infected patients. The infection can become chronic and may progress to cirrhosis or liver failure. It is
also associated with liver cancer. Chronic infections are associated with the highest mortality rates and are more
common in infants. Approximately 90% of infected infants become chronic carriers, compared with only 6–10% of
17
infected adults. Vaccination is available and is recommended for children as part of the standard vaccination
schedule (one dose at birth and the second by 18 months of age) and for adults at greater risk (e.g., those with
certain diseases, intravenous drug users, and those who have sex with multiple partners). Health-care agencies are
required to offer the HBV vaccine to all workers who have occupational exposure to blood and/or other infectious
materials.
HCV is often undiagnosed and therefore may be more widespread than is documented. It has a mean incubation
period of 45 days and is transmitted through contact with infected blood. Although some cases are asymptomatic
and/or resolve spontaneously, 75%–85% of infected individuals become chronic carriers. Nearly all cases result
from parenteral transmission often associated with IV drug use or transfusions. The risk is greatest for individuals
with past or current history of intravenous drug use or who have had sexual contact with infected individuals. It has
also been spread through contaminated blood products and can even be transmitted through contaminated
personal products such as toothbrushes and razors. New medications have recently been developed that show
great effectiveness in treating HCV and that are tailored to the specific genotype causing the infection.
HDV is uncommon in the United States and only occurs in individuals who are already infected with HBV, which it
requires for replication. Therefore, vaccination against HBV is also protective against HDV infection. HDV is
transmitted through contact with infected blood.
HEV infections are also rare in the United States but many individuals have a positive antibody titer for HEV. The
virus is most commonly spread by the fecal-oral route through food and/or water contamination, or person-to-
person contact, depending on the genotype of the virus, which varies by location. There are four genotypes that
differ somewhat in their mode of transmission, distribution, and other factors (for example, two are zoonotic and
two are not, and only one causes chronic infection). Genotypes three and four are only transmitted through food,
while genotypes one and two are also transmitted through water and fecal-oral routes. Genotype one is the only
type transmitted person-to-person and is the most common cause of HEV outbreaks. Consumption of undercooked
meat, especially deer or pork, and shellfish can lead to infection. Genotypes three and four are zoonoses, so they
can be transmitted from infected animals that are consumed. Pregnant people are at particular risk. This disease is
usually self-limiting within two weeks and does not appear to cause chronic infection.
General laboratory testing for hepatitis begins with blood testing to examine liver function (Figure 24.28). When the
liver is not functioning normally, the blood will contain elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase, alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), direct bilirubin, total bilirubin, serum albumin, serum
total protein, and calculated globulin, albumin/globulin (A/G) ratio. Some of these are included in a complete
metabolic panel (CMP), which may first suggest a possible liver problem and indicate the need for more
comprehensive testing. A hepatitis virus serological test panel can be used to detect antibodies for hepatitis viruses
A, B, C, and sometimes D. Additionally, other immunological and genomic tests are available.
Specific treatments other than supportive therapy, rest, and fluids are often not available for hepatitis virus
infection, except for HCV, which is often self-limited. Immunoglobulins can be used prophylactically following
possible exposure. Medications are also used, including interferon alpha 2b and antivirals (e.g., lamivudine,
entecavir, adefovir, and telbivudine) for chronic infections. Hepatitis C can be treated with interferon (as
monotherapy or combined with other treatments), protease inhibitors, and other antivirals (e.g., the polymerase
inhibitor sofosbuvir). Combination treatments are commonly used. Antiviral and immunosuppressive medications
may be used for chronic cases of HEV. In severe cases, liver transplants may be necessary. Additionally, vaccines
17 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “The ABCs of Hepatitis.” Updated 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/resources/
professionals/pdfs/abctable.pdf.
=== PDF PAGE 998 ===
984 24 • Digestive System Infections
are available to prevent infection with HAV and HBV. The HAV vaccine is also protective against HEV. The HBV
vaccine is also protective against HDV. There is no vaccine against HCV.
LINK TO LEARNING
Learn more information about hepatitis virus (https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/resources/professionals/pdfs/
abctable.pdf) infections.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Why do the five different hepatitis viruses all cause similar signs and symptoms?
MICRO CONNECTIONS
Preventing HBV Transmission in Health-Care Settings
Hepatitis B was once a leading on-the-job hazard for health-care workers. Many health-care workers over the years
have become infected, some developing cirrhosis and liver cancer. In 1982, the CDC recommended that health-care
workers be vaccinated against HBV, and rates of infection have declined since then. Even though vaccination is now
common, it is not always effective and not all individuals are vaccinated. Therefore, there is still a small risk for
infection, especially for health-care workers working with individuals who have chronic infections, such as drug
addicts, and for those with higher risk of needle sticks, such as phlebotomists. Dentists are also at risk.
Health-care workers need to take appropriate precautions to prevent infection by HBV and other illnesses. Blood is
the greatest risk, but other body fluids can also transmit infection. Damaged skin, as occurs with eczema or
psoriasis, can also allow transmission. Avoiding contact with body fluids, especially blood, by wearing gloves and
face protection and using disposable syringes and needles reduce the risk of infection. Washing exposed skin with
soap and water is recommended. Antiseptics may also be used, but may not help. Post-exposure treatment,
including treatment with hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) and vaccination, may be used in the event of exposure
to the virus from an infected patient. Detailed protocols are available for managing these situations. The virus can
remain infective for up to seven days when on surfaces, even if no blood or other fluids are visible, so it is important
to consider the best choices for disinfecting and sterilizing equipment that could potentially transmit the virus. The
18
CDC recommends a solution of 10% bleach to disinfect surfaces. Finally, testing blood products is important to
reduce the risk of transmission during transfusions and similar procedures.
DISEASE PROFILE
Viral Hepatitis
Hepatitis involves inflammation of the liver that typically manifests with signs and symptoms such as jaundice,
nausea, vomiting, joint pain, gray stool, and loss of appetite. However, the severity and duration of the disease
can vary greatly depending on the causative agent. Some infections may be completely asymptomatic, whereas
others may be life threatening. The five different viruses capable of causing hepatitis are compared in Figure
24.28. For the sake of comparison, this table presents only the unique aspects of each form of viral hepatitis, not
the commonalities.
18 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Hepatitis B FAQs for Health Professionals.” Updated August 4, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/
hepatitis/HBV/HBVfaq.htm.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 999 ===
24.5 • Protozoan Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 985
FIGURE 24.28
24.5 Protozoan Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the most common protozoans that can cause infections of the GI tract
• Compare the major characteristics of specific protozoan diseases affecting the GI tract
Like other microbes, protozoa are abundant in natural microbiota but can also be associated with significant illness.
=== PDF PAGE 1000 ===
986 24 • Digestive System Infections
Gastrointestinal diseases caused by protozoa are generally associated with exposure to contaminated food and
water, meaning that those without access to good sanitation are at greatest risk. Even in developed countries,
infections can occur and these microbes have sometimes caused significant outbreaks from contamination of public
water supplies.
Giardiasis
Also called backpacker’s diarrhea or beaver fever, giardiasis is a common disease in the United States caused by
the flagellated protist Giardia lamblia, also known as Giardia intestinalis or Giardia duodenalis (Figure 1.16). To
establish infection, G. lamblia uses a large adhesive disk to attach to the intestinal mucosa. The disk is comprised of
microtubules. During adhesion, the flagella of G. lamblia move in a manner that draws fluid out from under the disk,
resulting in an area of lower pressure that promotes its adhesion to the intestinal epithelial cells. Due to its
attachment, Giardia also blocks absorption of nutrients, including fats.
Transmission occurs through contaminated food or water or directly from person to person. Children in day-care
centers are at risk due to their tendency to put items into their mouths that may be contaminated. Large outbreaks
may occur if a public water supply becomes contaminated. Giardia have a resistant cyst stage in their life cycle that
is able to survive cold temperatures and the chlorination treatment typically used for drinking water in municipal
reservoirs. As a result, municipal water must be filtered to trap and remove these cysts. Once consumed by the host,
Giardia develops into the active tropozoite.
Infected individuals may be asymptomatic or have gastrointestinal signs and symptoms, sometimes accompanied
by weight loss. Common symptoms, which appear one to three weeks after exposure, include diarrhea, nausea,
stomach cramps, gas, greasy stool (because fat absorption is being blocked), and possible dehydration. The parasite
remains in the colon and does not cause systemic infection. Signs and symptoms generally clear within two to six
weeks. Chronic infections may develop and are often resistant to treatment. These are associated with weight loss,
episodic diarrhea, and malabsorption syndrome due to the blocked nutrient absorption.
Diagnosis may be made using observation under the microscope. A stool ova and parasite (O&P) exam involves
direct examination of a stool sample for the presence of cysts and trophozoites; it can be used to distinguish
common parasitic intestinal infections. ELISA and other immunoassay tests, including commercial direct
fluorescence antibody kits, are also used. The most common treatments use metronidazole as the first-line choice,
followed by tinidazole. If the infection becomes chronic, the parasites may become resistant to medications.
Cryptosporidiosis
Another protozoan intestinal illness is cryptosporidiosis, which is usually caused by Cryptosporidium parvum or C.
hominis. (Figure 24.29) These pathogens are commonly found in animals and can be spread in feces from mice,
birds, and farm animals. Contaminated water and food are most commonly responsible for transmission. The
protozoan can also be transmitted through human contact with infected animals or their feces.
In the United States, outbreaks of cryptosporidiosis generally occur through contamination of the public water
supply or contaminated water at water parks, swimming pools, and day-care centers. The risk is greatest in areas
with poor sanitation, making the disease more common in developing countries.
Signs and symptoms include watery diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, cramps, fever, dehydration, and weight loss. The
illness is generally self-limiting within a month. However, immunocompromised patients, such as those with HIV/
AIDS, are at particular risk of severe illness or death.
Diagnosis involves direct examination of stool samples, often over multiple days. As with giardiasis, a stool O&P
exam may be helpful. Acid fast staining is often used. Enzyme immunoassays and molecular analysis (PCR) are
available.
The first line of treatment is typically oral rehydration therapy. Medications are sometimes used to treat the
diarrhea. The broad-range anti-parasitic drug nitazoxanide can be used to treat cryptosporidiosis. Other anti-
parasitic drugs that can be used include azithromycin and paromomycin.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1001 ===
24.5 • Protozoan Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 987
FIGURE 24.29 Immunofluorescent staining allows for visualization of Cryptosporidium spp. (credit: modification of work by EPA/H.D.A.
Lindquist)
Amoebiasis (Amebiasis)
The protozoan parasite Entamoeba histolytica causes amoebiasis, which is known as amoebic dysentery in severe
cases. E. histolytica is generally transmitted through water or food that has fecal contamination. The disease is most
widespread in the developing world and is one of the leading causes of mortality from parasitic disease worldwide.
Disease can be caused by as few as 10 cysts being transmitted.
Signs and symptoms range from nonexistent to mild diarrhea to severe amoebic dysentery. Severe infection causes
the abdomen to become distended and may be associated with fever. The parasite may live in the colon without
causing signs or symptoms or may invade the mucosa to cause colitis. In some cases, the disease spreads to the
spleen, brain, genitourinary tract, or lungs. In particular, it may spread to the liver and cause an abscess. When a
liver abscess develops, fever, nausea, liver tenderness, weight loss, and pain in the right abdominal quadrant may
occur. Chronic infection may occur and is associated with intermittent diarrhea, mucus, pain, flatulence, and weight
loss.
Direct examination of fecal specimens may be used for diagnosis. As with cryptosporidiosis, samples are often
examined on multiple days. A stool O&P exam of fecal or biopsy specimens may be helpful. Immunoassay, serology,
biopsy, molecular, and antibody detection tests are available. Enzyme immunoassay may not distinguish current
from past illness. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be used to detect any liver abscesses. The first line of
treatment is metronidazole or tinidazole, followed by diloxanide furoate, iodoquinol, or paromomycin to eliminate
the cysts that remain.
Cyclosporiasis
The intestinal disease cyclosporiasis is caused by the protozoan Cyclospora cayetanensis. It is endemic to tropical
and subtropical regions and therefore uncommon in the United States, although there have been outbreaks
associated with contaminated produce imported from regions where the protozoan is more common.
This protist is transmitted through contaminated food and water and reaches the lining of the small intestine, where
it causes infection. Signs and symptoms begin within seven to ten days after ingestion. Based on limited data, it
19
appears to be seasonal in ways that differ regionally and that are poorly understood.
Some individuals do not develop signs or symptoms. Those who do may exhibit explosive and watery diarrhea, fever,
nausea, vomiting, cramps, loss of appetite, fatigue, and bloating. These symptoms may last for months without
treatment. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is the recommended treatment.
Microscopic examination is used for diagnosis. A stool O&P examination may be helpful. The oocysts have a
19 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Cyclosporiasis FAQs for Health Professionals.” Updated June 13, 2014.
http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/cyclosporiasis/health_professionals/hp-faqs.html.
=== PDF PAGE 1002 ===
988 24 • Digestive System Infections
distinctive blue halo when viewed using ultraviolet fluorescence microscopy (Figure 24.30).
FIGURE 24.30 Cyclospora cayetanensis are autofluorescent under ultraviolet light. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Which protozoan GI infections are common in the United States?
DISEASE PROFILE
Protozoan Gastrointestinal Infections
Protozoan GI infections are generally transmitted through contaminated food or water, triggering diarrhea and
vomiting that can lead to dehydration. Rehydration therapy is an important aspect of treatment, but most
protozoan GI infections can also be treated with drugs that target protozoans.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1003 ===
24.6 • Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 989
FIGURE 24.31
24.6 Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the most common helminths that cause infections of the GI tract
• Compare the major characteristics of specific helminthic diseases affecting GI tract
Helminths are widespread intestinal parasites. These parasites can be divided into three common groups: round-
bodied worms also described as nematodes, flat-bodied worms that are segmented (also described as cestodes),
and flat-bodied worms that are non-segmented (also described as trematodes). The nematodes include
roundworms, pinworms, hookworms, and whipworms. Cestodes include beef, pork, and fish tapeworms.
Trematodes are collectively called flukes and more uniquely identified with the body site where the adult flukes are
located. Although infection can have serious consequences, many of these parasites are so well adapted to the
human host that there is little obvious disease.
Ascariasis
Infections caused by the large nematode roundworm Ascaris lumbricoides, a soil-transmitted helminth, are called
20
ascariasis. Over 800 million to 1 billion people are estimated to be infected worldwide. Infections are most
common in warmer climates and at warmer times of year. At present, infections are uncommon in the United States.
The eggs of the worms are transmitted through contaminated food and water. This may happen if food is grown in
contaminated soil, including when manure is used as fertilizer.
=== PDF PAGE 1004 ===
990 24 • Digestive System Infections
When an individual consumes embryonated eggs (those with a developing embryo), the eggs travel to the intestine
and the larvae are able to hatch. Ascaris is able to produce proteases that allow for penetration and degradation of
host tissue. The juvenile worms can then enter the circulatory system and migrate to the lungs where they enter the
alveoli (air sacs). From here they crawl to the pharynx and then follow the gut lumen to return to the small intestine,
where they mature into adult roundworms. Females in the host will produce and release eggs that leave the host via
feces. In some cases, the worms can block ducts such as those of the pancreas or gallbladder.
The infection is commonly asymptomatic. When signs and symptoms are present, they include shortness of breath,
cough, nausea, diarrhea, blood in the stool, abdominal pain, weight loss, and fatigue. The roundworms may be
visible in the stool. In severe cases, children with substantial infections may experience intestinal blockage.
The eggs can be identified by microscopic examination of the stool (Figure 24.32). In some cases, the worms
themselves may be identified if coughed up or excreted in stool. They can also sometimes be identified by X-rays,
ultrasounds, or MRIs.
Ascariasis is self-limiting, but can last one to two years because the worms can inhibit the body’s inflammatory
response through glycan gimmickry (see Virulence Factors of Eukaryotic Pathogens). The first line of treatment is
mebendazole or albendazole. In some severe cases, surgery may be required.
FIGURE 24.32 (a) Adult Ascaris lumbricoides roundworms can cause intestinal blockage. (b) This mass of A. lumbricoides worms was
excreted by a child. (c) A micrograph of a fertilized egg of A. lumbricoides. Fertilized eggs can be distinguished from unfertilized eggs
because they are round rather than elongated and have a thicker cell wall. (credit a: modification of work by South African Medical Research
Council; credit b: modification of work by James Gathany, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit c: modification of work by
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Describe the route by which A. lumbricoides reaches the host’s intestines as an adult worm.
Hookworm
Two species of nematode worms are associated with hookworm infection. Both species are found in the Americas,
Africa, and Asia. Necator americanus is found predominantly in the United States and Australia. Another species,
Ancylostoma doudenale, is found in southern Europe, North Africa, the Middle East, and Asia.
The eggs of these species develop into larvae in soil contaminated by dog or cat feces. These larvae can penetrate
the skin. After traveling through the venous circulation, they reach the lungs. When they are coughed up, they are
then swallowed and can enter the intestine and develop into mature adults. At this stage, they attach to the wall of
the intestine, where they feed on blood and can potentially cause anemia. Signs and symptoms include cough, an
itchy rash, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, and diarrhea. In children, hookworms can affect physical and cognitive
growth.
Some hookworm species, such as Ancylostoma braziliense that is commonly found in animals such as cats and
dogs, can penetrate human skin and migrate, causing cutaneous larva migrans, a skin disease caused by the larvae
of hookworms. As they move across the skin, in the subcutaneous tissue, pruritic tracks appear (Figure 24.33).
20 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Parasites–Ascariasis.” Updated May 24, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/ascariasis/
index.html.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1005 ===
24.6 • Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 991
The infection is diagnosed using microscopic examination of the stool, allowing for observation of eggs in the feces.
Medications such as albendazole, mebendazole, and pyrantel pamoate are used as needed to treat systemic
infection. In addition to systemic medication for symptoms associated with cutaneous larva migrans, topical
thiabendazole is applied to the affected areas.
FIGURE 24.33 (a) This animal hookworm, Ancylostoma caninum, is attached to the intestinal wall. (b) The tracks of hookworms are visible
in this individual with cutaneous larva migrans. (c) This micrograph shows the microscopic egg of a hookworm. (credit a, c: modification of
work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Strongyloidiasis
Strongyloidiasis is generally caused by Strongyloides stercoralis, a soil-transmitted helminth with both free-living
and parasitic forms. In the parasitic form, the larvae of these nematodes generally penetrate the body through the
skin, especially through bare feet, although transmission through organ transplantation or at facilities like day-care
centers can also occur. When excreted in the stool, larvae can become free-living adults rather than developing into
the parasitic form. These free-living worms reproduce, laying eggs that hatch into larvae that can develop into the
parasitic form. In the parasitic life cycle, infective larvae enter the skin, generally through the feet. The larvae reach
the circulatory system, which allows them to travel to the alveolar spaces of the lungs. They are transported to the
pharynx where, like many other helminths, the infected patient coughs them up and swallows them again so that
they return to the intestine. Once they reach the intestine, females live in the epithelium and produce eggs that
develop asexually, unlike the free-living forms, which use sexual reproduction. The larvae may be excreted in the
stool or can reinfect the host by entering the tissue of the intestines and skin around the anus, which can lead to
chronic infections.
The condition is generally asymptomatic, although severe symptoms can develop after treatment with
corticosteroids for asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or following other forms of
immunosuppression. When the immune system is suppressed, the rate of autoinfection increases, and huge
amounts of larvae migrate to organs throughout the body.
Signs and symptoms are generally nonspecific. The condition can cause a rash at the site of skin entry, cough (dry or
with blood), fever, nausea, difficulty breathing, bloating, pain, heartburn, and, rarely, arthritis, or cardiac or kidney
complications. Disseminated strongyloidiasis or hyperinfection is a life-threatening form of the disease that can
occur, usually following immunosuppression such as that caused by glucocorticoid treatment (most commonly),
with other immunosuppressive medications, with HIV infection, or with malnutrition.
As with other helminths, direct examination of the stool is important in diagnosis. Ideally, this should be continued
over seven days. Serological testing, including antigen testing, is also available. These can be limited by cross-
reactions with other similar parasites and by the inability to distinguish current from resolved infection. Ivermectin
is the preferred treatment, with albendazole as a secondary option.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How does an acute infection of S. stercoralis become chronic?
=== PDF PAGE 1006 ===
992 24 • Digestive System Infections
Pinworms (Enterobiasis)
Enterobius vermicularis, commonly called pinworms, are tiny (2–13 mm) nematodes that cause enterobiasis. Of all
helminthic infections, enterobiasis is the most common in the United States, affecting as many as one-third of
21
American children. Although the signs and symptoms are generally mild, patients may experience abdominal pain
and insomnia from itching of the perianal region, which frequently occurs at night when worms leave the anus to lay
eggs. The itching contributes to transmission, as the disease is transmitted through the fecal-oral route. When an
infected individual scratches the anal area, eggs may get under the fingernails and later be deposited near the
individual’s mouth, causing reinfection, or on fomites, where they can be transferred to new hosts. After being
ingested, the larvae hatch within the small intestine and then take up residence in the colon and develop into adults.
From the colon, the female adult exits the body at night to lay eggs (Figure 24.34).
Infection is diagnosed in any of three ways. First, because the worms emerge at night to lay eggs, it is possible to
inspect the perianal region for worms while an individual is asleep. An alternative is to use transparent tape to
remove eggs from the area around the anus first thing in the morning for three days to yield eggs for microscopic
examination. Finally, it may be possible to detect eggs through examination of samples from under the fingernails,
where eggs may lodge due to scratching. Once diagnosis has been made, mebendazole, albendazole, and pyrantel
pamoate are effective for treatment.
FIGURE 24.34 (a) E. vermicularis are tiny nematodes commonly called pinworms. (b) This micrograph shows pinworm eggs.
Trichuriasis
The nematode whipworm Trichuris trichiura is a parasite that is transmitted by ingestion from soil-contaminated
hands or food and causes trichuriasis. Infection is most common in warm environments, especially when there is
poor sanitation and greater risk of fecal contamination of soil, or when food is grown in soil using manure as a
fertilizer. The signs and symptoms may be minimal or nonexistent. When a substantial infection develops, signs and
symptoms include painful, frequent diarrhea that may contain mucus and blood. It is possible for the infection to
cause rectal prolapse, a condition in which a portion of the rectum becomes detached from the inside of the body
and protrudes from the anus (Figure 24.35). Severely infected children may experience reduced growth and their
cognitive development may be affected.
When fertilized eggs are ingested, they travel to the intestine and the larvae emerge, taking up residence in the walls
of the colon and cecum. They attach themselves with part of their bodies embedded in the mucosa. The larvae
mature and live in the cecum and ascending colon. After 60 to 70 days, females begin to lay 3000 to 20,000 eggs
per day.
Diagnosis involves examination of the feces for the presence of eggs. It may be necessary to use concentration
techniques and to collect specimens on multiple days. Following diagnosis, the infection may be treated with
mebendazole, albendazole, or ivermectin.
21 “Roundworms.” University of Maryland Medical Center Medical Reference Guide. Last reviewed December 9, 2014. https://umm.edu/
health/medical/altmed/condition/roundworms.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1007 ===
24.6 • Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 993
FIGURE 24.35 (a) This adult female Trichuris whipworm is a soil-transmitted parasite. (b) Trichuris trichiura eggs are ingested and travel to
the intestines where the larvae emerge and take up residence. (c) Rectal prolapse is a condition that can result from whipworm infections.
It occurs when the rectum loses its attachment to the internal body structure and protrudes from the anus. (credit a, b, c: modification of
work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Trichinosis
Trichinosis (trichenellosis) develops following consumption of food that contains Trichinella spiralis (most
commonly) or other Trichinella species. These microscopic nematode worms are most commonly transmitted in
meat, especially pork, that has not been cooked thoroughly. T. spiralis larvae in meat emerge from cysts when
exposed to acid and pepsin in the stomach. They develop into mature adults within the large intestine. The larvae
produced in the large intestine are able to migrate into the muscles mechanically via the stylet of the parasite,
forming cysts. Muscle proteins are reduced in abundance or undetectable in cells that contain Trichinella (nurse
cells). Animals that ingest the cysts from other animals can later develop infection (Figure 24.36).
Although infection may be asymptomatic, symptomatic infections begin within a day or two of consuming the
nematodes. Abdominal symptoms arise first and can include diarrhea, constipation, and abdominal pain. Other
possible symptoms include headache, light sensitivity, muscle pain, fever, cough, chills, and conjunctivitis. More
severe symptoms affecting motor coordination, breathing, and the heart sometimes occur. It may take months for
the symptoms to resolve, and the condition is occasionally fatal. Mild cases may be mistaken for influenza or similar
conditions.
Infection is diagnosed using clinical history, muscle biopsy to look for larvae, and serological testing, including
immunoassays. Enzyme immunoassay is the most common test. It is difficult to effectively treat larvae that have
formed cysts in the muscle, although medications may help. It is best to begin treatment as soon as possible
because medications such as mebendazole and albendazole are effective in killing only the adult worms in the
intestine. Steroids may be used to reduce inflammation if larvae are in the muscles.
FIGURE 24.36 (a) This image shows larvae of T. spiralis within muscle. (b) In meat, the larvae have a characteristic coiled appearance, as
seen in this partially digested larva in bear meat. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
=== PDF PAGE 1008 ===
994 24 • Digestive System Infections
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Compare and contrast the transmissions of pinworms and whipworms.
Tapeworms (Taeniasis)
Taeniasis is a tapeworm infection, generally caused by pork (Taenia solium), beef (Taenia saginata), and Asian
(Taenia asiatica) tapeworms found in undercooked meat. Consumption of raw or undercooked fish, including
contaminated sushi, can also result in infection from the fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium latum). Tapeworms are
flatworms (cestodes) with multiple body segments and a head called a scolex that attaches to the intestinal wall.
Tapeworms can become quite large, reaching 4 to 8 meters long (Figure 24.37). Figure 5.23 illustrates the life cycle
of a tapeworm.
FIGURE 24.37 (a) An adult tapeworm uses the scolex to attach to the intestinal wall. (b) The egg of a pork tapeworm (Taenia solium) is
visible in this micrograph. (credit a, b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Tapeworms attached to the intestinal wall produce eggs that are excreted in feces. After ingestion by animals, the
eggs hatch and the larvae emerge. They may take up residence in the intestine, but can sometimes move to other
tissues, especially muscle or brain tissue. When T. solium larvae form cysts in tissue, the condition is called
cysticercosis. This occurs through ingestion of eggs via the fecal-oral route, not through consumption of
undercooked meat. It can develop in the muscles, eye (ophthalmic cysticercosis), or brain (neurocysticercosis).
Infections may be asymptomatic or they may cause mild gastrointestinal symptoms such as epigastric discomfort,
nausea, diarrhea, flatulence, or hunger pains. It is also common to find visible tapeworm segments passed in the
stool. In cases of cysticercosis, symptoms differ depending upon where the cysts become established.
Neurocysticercosis can have severe, life-threatening consequences and is associated with headaches and seizures
because of the presence of the tapeworm larvae encysted in the brain. Cysts in muscles may be asymptomatic, or
they may be painful.
To diagnose these conditions, microscopic analysis of stool samples from three separate days is generally
recommended. Eggs or body segments, called proglottids, may be visible in these samples. Molecular methods have
been developed but are not yet widely available. Imaging, such as CT and MRI, may be used to detect cysts.
Praziquantel or niclosamide are used for treatment.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1009 ===
24.6 • Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 995
MICRO CONNECTIONS
What’s in Your Sushi Roll?
As foods that contain raw fish, such as sushi and sashimi, continue to increase in popularity throughout the world,
so does the risk of parasitic infections carried by raw or undercooked fish. Diphyllobothrium species, known as fish
tapeworms, is one of the main culprits. Evidence suggests that undercooked salmon caused an increase in
Diphyllobothrium infections in British Columbia in the 1970s and early 1980s. In the years since, the number of
reported cases in the United States and Canada has been low, but it is likely that cases are underreported because
22
the causative agent is not easily recognized.
Another illness transmitted in undercooked fish is herring worm disease, or anisakiasis, in which nematodes attach
to the epithelium of the esophagus, stomach, or small intestine. Cases have increased around the world as raw fish
23
consumption has increased.
Although the message may be unpopular with sushi lovers, fish should be frozen or cooked before eating. The
extremely low and high temperatures associated with freezing and cooking kill worms and larvae contained in the
meat, thereby preventing infection. Ingesting fresh, raw sushi may make for a delightful meal, but it also entails
some risk.
Hydatid Disease
Another cestode, Echinococcus granulosus, causes a serious infection known as hydatid disease (cystic
echinococcosis). E. granulosus is found in dogs (the definitive host), as well as several intermediate hosts (sheep,
pigs, goats, cattle). The cestodes are transmitted through eggs in the feces from infected animals, which can be an
occupational hazard for individuals who work in agriculture.
Once ingested, E. granulosus eggs hatch in the small intestine and release the larvae. The larvae invade the
intestinal wall to gain access to the circulatory system. They form hydatid cysts in internal organs, especially in the
lungs and liver, that grow slowly and are often undetected until they become large. If the cysts burst, a severe
allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) may occur.
Cysts present in the liver can cause enlargement of the liver, nausea, vomiting, right epigastric pain, pain in the right
upper quadrant, and possible allergic signs and symptoms. Cysts in the lungs can lead to alveolar disease.
Abdominal pain, weight loss, pain, and malaise may occur, and inflammatory processes develop.
E. granulosus can be detected through imaging (ultrasonography, CT, MRI) that shows the cysts. Serologic tests,
including ELISA and indirect hemagglutinin tests, are used. Cystic disease is most effectively treated with surgery to
remove cysts, but other treatments are also available, including chemotherapy with anti-helminthic drugs
(albendazole or mebendazole).
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Describe the risks of the cysts associated with taeniasis and hydatid disease.
Flukes
Flukes are flatworms that have a leaflike appearance. They are a type of trematode worm, and multiple species are
associated with disease in humans. The most common are liver flukes and intestinal flukes (Figure 24.38).
22 Nancy Craig. “Fish Tapeworm and Sushi.” Canadian Family Physician 58 (2012) 6: pp. 654–658. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC3374688/.
23 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Anisakiasis FAQs.” Updated November 12, 2012. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/
anisakiasis/faqs.html.
=== PDF PAGE 1010 ===
996 24 • Digestive System Infections
FIGURE 24.38 (a) A liver fluke infects the bile ducts. (b) An intestinal fluke infects the intestines. (credit a: modification of work by Shafiei R,
Sarkari B, Sadjjadi SM, Mowlavi GR, and Moshfe A; credit b: modification of work by Georgia Division of Public Health)
Liver Flukes
The liver flukes are several species of trematodes that cause disease by interfering with the bile duct. Fascioliasis is
caused by Fasciola hepatica and Fasciola gigantica in contaminated raw or undercooked aquatic plants (e.g.,
watercress). In Fasciola infection, adult flukes develop in the bile duct and release eggs into the feces. Clonochiasis
is caused by Clonorchis sinensis in contaminated freshwater fish. Other flukes, such as Opisthorchis viverrini (found
in fish) and Opisthorchis felineus (found in freshwater snails), also cause infections. Liver flukes spend part of their
life cycle in freshwater snails, which serve as an intermediate host. Humans are typically infected after eating
aquatic plants contaminated by the infective larvae after they have left the snail. Once they reach the human
intestine, they migrate back to the bile duct, where they mature. The life cycle is similar for the other infectious liver
flukes, (see Figure 5.22).
When Fasciola flukes cause acute infection, signs and symptoms include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, rash,
fever, malaise, and breathing difficulties. If the infection becomes chronic, with adult flukes living in the bile duct,
then cholangitis, cirrhosis, pancreatitis, cholecystitis, and gallstones may develop. Symptoms are similar for
infections by other liver flukes. Cholangiocarcinoma can occur from C. sinensis infection. The Opisthorchis species
can also be associated with cancer development.
Diagnosis is accomplished using patient history and examination of samples from feces or other samples (such as
vomitus). Because the eggs may appear similar, immunoassay techniques are available that can help distinguish
species. The preferred treatment for fascioliasis is triclabendazole. C. sinensis and Opisthorchis spp. infections are
treated with praziquantel or albendazole.
Intestinal Flukes
The intestinal flukes are trematodes that develop in the intestines. Many, such as Fasciolopsis buski, which causes
fasciolopsiasis, are closely related to liver flukes. Intestinal flukes are ingested from contaminated aquatic plants
that have not been properly cooked. When the cysts are consumed, the larvae emerge in the duodenum and develop
into adults while attached to the intestinal epithelium. The eggs are released in stool.
Intestinal fluke infection is often asymptomatic, but some cases may involve mild diarrhea and abdominal pain.
More severe symptoms such as vomiting, nausea, allergic reactions, and anemia can sometimes occur, and high
parasite loads may sometimes lead to intestinal obstructions.
Diagnosis is the same as with liver flukes: examination of feces or other samples and immunoassay. Praziquantel is
used to treat infections caused by intestinal flukes.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How are flukes transmitted?
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1011 ===
24.6 • Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 997
DISEASE PROFILE
Helminthic Gastrointestinal Infections
Numerous helminths are capable of colonizing the GI tract. Many such infections are asymptomatic, but others
may cause signs and symptoms ranging from mild GI stress to severe systemic infection. Helminths have
complex and unique life cycles that dictate their specific modes of transmission. Most helminthic infections can
be treated with medications.
=== PDF PAGE 1012 ===
998 24 • Digestive System Infections
FIGURE 24.39
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1013 ===
24.6 • Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 999
FIGURE 24.40
CLINICAL FOCUS
Resolution
Carli’s doctor explained that she had bacterial gastroenteritis caused by Salmonella bacteria. The source of
these bacteria was likely the undercooked egg. Had the egg been fully cooked, the high temperature would have
been sufficient to kill any Salmonella in or on the egg. In this case, enough bacteria survived to cause an
infection once the egg was eaten.
Carli’s signs and symptoms continued to worsen. Her fever became higher, her vomiting and diarrhea continued,
and she began to become dehydrated. She felt thirsty all the time and had continual abdominal cramps. Carli’s
doctor treated her with intravenous fluids to help with her dehydration, but did not prescribe antibiotics. Carli’s
parents were confused because they thought a bacterial infection should always be treated with antibiotics.
The doctor explained that the worst medical problem for Carli was dehydration. Except in the most vulnerable
and sick patients, such as those with HIV/AIDS, antibiotics do not reduce recovery time or improve outcomes in
Salmonella infections. In fact, antibiotics can actually delay the natural excretion of bacteria from the body.
Rehydration therapy replenishes lost fluids, diminishing the effects of dehydration and improving the patient’s
condition while the infection resolves.
After two days of rehydration therapy, Carli’s signs and symptoms began to fade. She was still somewhat thirsty,
but the amount of urine she passed became larger and the color lighter. She stopped vomiting. Her fever was
=== PDF PAGE 1014 ===
1000 24 • Digestive System Infections
gone, and so was the diarrhea. At that point, stool analysis found very few Salmonella bacteria. In one week,
Carli was discharged as fully recovered.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1015 ===
24 • Summary 1001
Summary
24.1 Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Helicobacter pylori, Clostridium perfringens,
Digestive System Clostridioides difficile, Bacillus cereus, and
Yersinia bacteria.
• The digestive tract, consisting of the oral cavity,
• C. difficile is an important cause of hospital
pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small intestine,
acquired infection.
and large intestine, has a normal microbiota that
• Vibrio cholerae causes cholera, which can be a
is important for health.
severe diarrheal illness.
• The constant movement of materials through the
• Different strains of E. coli, including ETEC, EPEC,
gastrointestinal canal, the protective layer of
EIEC, and EHEC, cause different illnesses with
mucus, the normal microbiota, and the harsh
varying degrees of severity.
chemical environment in the stomach and small
• H. pylori is associated with peptic ulcers.
intestine help to prevent colonization by
• Salmonella enterica serotypes can cause typhoid
pathogens.
fever, a more severe illness than salmonellosis.
• Infections or microbial toxins in the oral cavity
• Rehydration and other supportive therapies are
can cause tooth decay, periodontal disease,
often used as general treatments.
and various types of ulcers.
• Careful antibiotic use is required to reduce the
• Infections and intoxications of the
risk of causing C. difficile infections and when
gastrointestinal tract can cause general
treating antibiotic-resistant infections.
symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
and fever. Localized inflammation of the GI tract 24.4 Viral Infections of the Gastrointestinal
can result in gastritis, enteritis, gastroenteritis, Tract
hepatitis, or colitis, and damage to epithelial
• Common viral causes of gastroenteritis include
cells of the colon can lead to dysentery.
rotaviruses, noroviruses, and astroviruses.
• Foodborne illness refers to infections or
• Hepatitis may be caused by several unrelated
intoxications that originate with pathogens or
viruses: hepatitis viruses A, B, C, D, and E.
toxins ingested in contaminated food or water.
• The hepatitis viruses differ in their modes of
24.2 Microbial Diseases of the Mouth and transmission, treatment, and potential for
Oral Cavity chronic infection.
• Dental caries, tartar, and gingivitis are caused 24.5 Protozoan Infections of the
by overgrowth of oral bacteria, usually Gastrointestinal Tract
Streptococcus and Actinomyces species, as a
• Giardiasis, cryptosporidiosis, amoebiasis, and
result of insufficient dental hygiene.
cyclosporiasis are intestinal infections caused
• Gingivitis can worsen, allowing Porphyromonas,
by protozoans.
Streptococcus, and Actinomyces species to
• Protozoan intestinal infections are commonly
spread and cause periodontitis. When Prevotella
transmitted through contaminated food and
intermedia, Fusobacterium species, and
water.
Treponema vicentii are involved, it can lead to
• Treatment varies depending on the causative
acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis.
agent, so proper diagnosis is important.
• The herpes simplex virus type 1 can cause
• Microscopic examination of stool or biopsy
lesions of the mouth and throat called herpetic
specimens is often used in diagnosis, in
gingivostomatitis.
combination with other approaches.
• Other infections of the mouth include oral
thrush, a fungal infection caused by overgrowth 24.6 Helminthic Infections of the
of Candida yeast, and mumps, a viral infection of Gastrointestinal Tract
the salivary glands caused by the mumps virus, a
• Helminths often cause intestinal infections after
paramyxovirus.
transmission to humans through exposure to
24.3 Bacterial Infections of the contaminated soil, water, or food. Signs and
Gastrointestinal Tract symptoms are often mild, but severe
complications may develop in some cases.
• Major causes of gastrointestinal illness include
• Ascaris lumbricoides eggs are transmitted
Salmonella spp., Staphylococcus spp.,
=== PDF PAGE 1016 ===
1002 24 • Review Questions
through contaminated food or water and hatch in • Trichinella spp. is transmitted through
the intestine. Juvenile larvae travel to the lungs undercooked meat. Larvae in the meat emerge
and then to the pharynx, where they are from cysts and mature in the large intestine. They
swallowed and returned to the intestines to can migrate to the muscles and form new cysts,
mature. These nematode roundworms cause causing trichinosis.
ascariasis. • Taenia spp. and Diphyllobothrium latum are
• Necator americanus and Ancylostoma doudenale tapeworms transmitted through undercooked
cause hookworm infection when larvae food or the fecal-oral route. Taenia infections
penetrate the skin from soil contaminated by dog cause taeniasis. Tapeworms use their scolex to
or cat feces. They travel to the lungs and are then attach to the intestinal wall. Larvae may also
swallowed to mature in the intestines. move to muscle or brain tissue.
• Strongyloides stercoralis are transmitted from • Echinococcus granulosus is a cestode
soil through the skin to the lungs and then to the transmitted through eggs in the feces of infected
intestine where they cause strongyloidiasis. animals, especially dogs. After ingestion, eggs
• Enterobius vermicularis are nematode pinworms hatch in the small intestine, and the larvae
transmitted by the fecal-oral route. After invade the intestinal wall and travel through the
ingestion, they travel to the colon where they circulatory system to form dangerous cysts in
cause enterobiasis. internal organs, causing hydatid disease.
• Trichuris trichiura can be transmitted through soil • Flukes are transmitted through aquatic plants or
or fecal contamination and cause trichuriasis. fish. Liver flukes cause disease by interfering
After ingestion, the eggs travel to the intestine with the bile duct. Intestinal flukes develop in
where the larvae emerge and mature, attaching the intestines, where they attach to the intestinal
to the walls of the colon and cecum. epithelium.
Review Questions
Multiple Choice
1 . Which of the following is NOT a way the normal b. Streptococcus mutans
microbiota of the intestine helps to prevent c. Escherichia coli
infection? d. Clostridioides difficile
a. It produces acids that lower the pH of the
stomach. 4 . What type of organism causes thrush?
b. It speeds up the process by which a. a bacterium
microbes are flushed from the digestive b. a virus
tract. c. a fungus
c. It consumes food and occupies space, d. a protozoan
outcompeting potential pathogens.
d. It generates large quantities of oxygen that 5 . In mumps, what glands swell to produce the
kill anaerobic pathogens. disease’s characteristic appearance?
a. the sublingual glands
2 . What types of microbes live in the intestines? b. the gastric glands
a. Diverse species of bacteria, archaea, and c. the parotid glands
fungi, especially Bacteroides and d. the submandibular glands
Firmicutes bacteria
b. A narrow range of bacteria, especially 6 . Which of the following is true of HSV-1?
Firmicutes a. It causes oral thrush in
c. A narrow range of bacteria and fungi, immunocompromised patients.
especially Bacteroides b. Infection is generally self-limiting.
d. Archaea and fungi only c. It is a bacterium.
d. It is usually treated with amoxicillin.
3 . What pathogen is the most important
contributor to biofilms in plaque? 7 . Which type of E. coli infection can be severe with
a. Staphylococcus aureus life-threatening consequences such as
hemolytic uremic syndrome?
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1017 ===
24 • Review Questions 1003
a. ETEC fluorescence microscopy?
b. EPEC a. Giardia lamblia
c. EHEC b. Cryptosporidium hominis
d. EIEC c. Cyclospora cayetanesis
d. Entamoeba histolytica
8 . Which species of Shigella has a type that
produces Shiga toxin? 14 . The micrograph shows protozoans attached to
a. S. boydii the intestinal wall of a gerbil. Based on what you
b. S. flexneri know about protozoan intestinal parasites, what
c. S. dysenteriae is it?
d. S. sonnei
9 . Which type of bacterium produces an A-B toxin?
a. Salmonella
b. Vibrio cholera
c. ETEC
d. Shigella dysenteriae
10 . Which form of hepatitisvirus can only infect an
individual who is already infected with another
hepatitisvirus?
a. HDV
b. HAV
FIGURE 24.41 (credit: Dr. Stan Erlandsen, Centers for
c. HBV Disease Control and Prevention)
d. HEV
a. Giardia lamblia
b. Cryptosporidium hominis
11 . Which cause of viral gastroenteritis commonly
c. Cyclospora cayetanesis
causes projectile vomiting?
d. Entamoeba histolytica
a. hepatitisvirus
b. Astroviruses
15 . What is another name for Trichuris trichiura?
c. Rotavirus
a. pinworm
d. Noroviruses
b. whipworm
c. hookworm
12 . Which protozoan is associated with the ability to
d. ascariasis
cause severe dysentery?
a. Giardia lamblia
16 . Which type of helminth infection can be
b. Cryptosporidium hominis
diagnosed using tape?
c. Cyclospora cayetanesis
a. pinworm
d. Entamoeba histolytica
b. whipworm
c. hookworm
13 . Which protozoan has a unique appearance, with
d. tapeworm
a blue halo, when viewed using ultraviolet
Fill in the Blank
17 . The part of the gastrointestinal tract with the 20 . Jaundice results from a buildup of _________.
largest natural microbiota is the _________.
21 . Chronic _________ infections cause the unique
18 . When plaque becomes heavy and hardened, it is sign of disease of greasy stool and are often
called dental calculus or _________. resistant to treatment.
19 . Antibiotic associated pseudomembranous colitis 22 . Liver flukes are often found in the _________
is caused by _________. duct.
=== PDF PAGE 1018 ===
1004 24 • Review Questions
Short Answer
23 . How does the diarrhea caused by dysentery 26 . What is an O&P exam?
differ from other types of diarrhea?
27 . Why does the coughing up of worms play an
24 . Why do sugary foods promote dental caries? important part in the life cycle of some
helminths, such as the roundworm Ascaris
25 . Which forms of viral hepatitis are transmitted
lumbricoides?
through the fecal-oral route?
Critical Thinking
28 . Why does use of antibiotics and/or proton pump (an infection) or a toxin (an intoxication)?
inhibitors contribute to the development of
31 . Based on what you know about HBV, what are
Clostridioides difficile infections?
some ways that its transmission could be
29 . Why did scientists initially think it was unlikely reduced in a health-care setting?
that a bacterium caused peptic ulcers?
32 . Cases of strongyloidiasis are often more severe
30 . Does it makes a difference in treatment to know in patients who are using corticosteroids to treat
if a particular illness is caused by a bacterium another disorder. Explain why this might occur.
Access for free at openstax.org