=== PDF PAGE 1071 ===
CHAPTER 26
Nervous System Infections
FIGURE 26.1 This dog is exhibiting the restlessness and aggression associated with rabies, a neurological disease that frequently affects
mammals and can be transmitted to humans. (credit: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
26.1 Anatomy of the Nervous System
26.2 Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous System
26.3 Acellular Diseases of the Nervous System
26.4 Fungal and Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous System
INTRODUCTION Few diseases inspire the kind of fear that rabies does. The name is derived from the Latin word for
“madness” or “fury,” most likely because animals infected with rabies may behave with uncharacteristic rage and
aggression. And while the thought of being attacked by a rabid animal is terrifying enough, the disease itself is even
more frightful. Once symptoms appear, the disease is almost always fatal, even when treated.
Rabies is an example of a neurological disease caused by an acellular pathogen. The rabies virus enters nervous
tissue shortly after transmission and makes its way to the central nervous system, where its presence leads to
changes in behavior and motor function. Well-known symptoms associated with rabid animals include foaming at
the mouth, hydrophobia (fear of water), and unusually aggressive behavior. Rabies claims tens of thousands of
human lives worldwide, mainly in Africa and Asia. Most human cases result from dog bites, although many mammal
species can become infected and transmit the disease. Human infection rates are low in the United States and many
other countries as a result of control measures in animal populations. However, rabies is not the only disease with
serious or fatal neurological effects. In this chapter, we examine the important microbial diseases of the nervous
system.
=== PDF PAGE 1072 ===
1058 26 • Nervous System Infections
26.1 Anatomy of the Nervous System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the major anatomical features of the nervous system
• Explain why there is no normal microbiota of the nervous system
• Explain how microorganisms overcome defenses of the nervous system to cause infection
• Identify and describe general symptoms associated with various infections of the nervous system
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 1
David is a 35-year-old carpenter from New Jersey. A year ago, he was diagnosed with Crohn’s disease, a chronic
inflammatory bowel disease that has no known cause. He has been taking a prescription corticosteroid to
manage the condition, and the drug has been highly effective in keeping his symptoms at bay. However, David
recently fell ill and decided to visit his primary care physician. His symptoms included a fever, a persistent
cough, and shortness of breath. His physician ordered a chest X-ray, which revealed consolidation of the right
lung. The doctor prescribed a course of levofloxacin and told David to come back in a week if he did not feel
better.
• What type of drug is levofloxacin?
• What type of microbes would this drug be effective against?
• What type of infection is consistent with David’s symptoms?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.
The human nervous system can be divided into two interacting subsystems: the peripheral nervous system (PNS)
and the central nervous system (CNS). The CNS consists of the brain and spinal cord. The peripheral nervous
system is an extensive network of nerves connecting the CNS to the muscles and sensory structures. The
relationship of these systems is illustrated in Figure 26.2.
The Central Nervous System
The brain is the most complex and sensitive organ in the body. It is responsible for all functions of the body,
including serving as the coordinating center for all sensations, mobility, emotions, and intellect. Protection for the
brain is provided by the bones of the skull, which in turn are covered by the scalp, as shown in Figure 26.3. The scalp
is composed of an outer layer of skin, which is loosely attached to the aponeurosis, a flat, broad tendon layer that
anchors the superficial layers of the skin. The periosteum, below the aponeurosis, firmly encases the bones of the
skull and provides protection, nutrition to the bone, and the capacity for bone repair. Below the boney layer of the
skull are three layers of membranes called meninges that surround the brain. The relative positions of these
meninges are shown in Figure 26.3. The meningeal layer closest to the bones of the skull is called the dura mater
(literally meaning tough mother). Below the dura mater lies the arachnoid mater (literally spider-like mother). The
innermost meningeal layer is a delicate membrane called the pia mater (literally tender mother). Unlike the other
meningeal layers, the pia mater firmly adheres to the convoluted surface of the brain. Between the arachnoid mater
and pia mater is the subarachnoid space. The subarachnoid space within this region is filled with cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF). This watery fluid is produced by cells of the choroid plexus—areas in each ventricle of the brain that
consist of cuboidal epithelial cells surrounding dense capillary beds. The CSF serves to deliver nutrients and remove
waste from neural tissues.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1073 ===
26.1 • Anatomy of the Nervous System 1059
FIGURE 26.2 The essential components of the human nervous system are shown in this illustration. The central nervous system (CNS)
consists of the brain and spinal cord. It connects to the peripheral nervous system (PNS), a network of nerves that extends throughout the
body.
FIGURE 26.3 The layers of tissue surrounding the human brain include three meningeal membranes: the dura mater, arachnoid mater, and
=== PDF PAGE 1074 ===
1060 26 • Nervous System Infections
pia mater. (credit: modification of work by National Institutes of Health)
The Blood-Brain Barrier
The tissues of the CNS have extra protection in that they are not exposed to blood or the immune system in the
same way as other tissues. The blood vessels that supply the brain with nutrients and other chemical substances lie
on top of the pia mater. The capillaries associated with these blood vessels in the brain are less permeable than
those in other locations in the body. The capillary endothelial cells form tight junctions that control the transfer of
blood components to the brain. In addition, cranial capillaries have far fewer fenestra (pore-like structures that are
sealed by a membrane) and pinocytotic vesicles than other capillaries. As a result, materials in the circulatory
system have a very limited ability to interact with the CNS directly. This phenomenon is referred to as the blood-
brain barrier.
The blood-brain barrier protects the cerebrospinal fluid from contamination, and can be quite effective at excluding
potential microbial pathogens. As a consequence of these defenses, there is no normal microbiota in the
cerebrospinal fluid. The blood-brain barrier also inhibits the movement of many drugs into the brain, particularly
compounds that are not lipid soluble. This has profound ramifications for treatments involving infections of the CNS,
because it is difficult for drugs to cross the blood-brain barrier to interact with pathogens that cause infections.
The spinal cord also has protective structures similar to those surrounding the brain. Within the bones of the
vertebrae are meninges of dura mater (sometimes called the dural sheath), arachnoid mater, pia mater, and a blood-
spinal cord barrier that controls the transfer of blood components from blood vessels associated with the spinal
cord.
To cause an infection in the CNS, pathogens must successfully breach the blood-brain barrier or blood-spinal cord
barrier. Various pathogens employ different virulence factors and mechanisms to achieve this, but they can
generally be grouped into four categories: intercellular (also called paracellular), transcellular, leukocyte facilitated,
and nonhematogenous. Intercellular entry involves the use of microbial virulence factors, toxins, or inflammation-
mediated processes to pass between the cells of the blood-brain barrier. In transcellular entry, the pathogen passes
through the cells of the blood-brain barrier using virulence factors that allow it to adhere to and trigger uptake by
vacuole- or receptor-mediated mechanisms. Leukocyte-facilitated entry is a Trojan-horse mechanism that occurs
when a pathogen infects peripheral blood leukocytes to directly enter the CNS. Nonhematogenous entry allows
pathogens to enter the brain without encountering the blood-brain barrier; it occurs when pathogens travel along
either the olfactory or trigeminal cranial nerves that lead directly into the CNS. For example, Naegleria fowleri, the
"brain-eating amoeba," reaches the brain after entering the body through the nasal canal and attaching to the
olfactory nerve.
Most medicines, such as antiretroviral therapies (ART) and anti-cancer drugs, cannot penetrate the blood-brain
barrier to treat illness or eradicate pathogens. The brain thus becomes a reservoir for infections. For example, HIV
eradicated elsewhere in the body can survive the brain, where it can lead to cognitive decline and also can reseed
the infection more widely. Researchers such as Johns Hopkin's Dionna Williams studies the impact of these
persistent infections as well as the mechanisms that enable the pathogens to cross the barrier. She has identified
the specific proteins that allow HIV-infected monocytes to cross, and notes the role that dopamine plays in barrier
permeability. Williams also researchers the mechanisms and impact of cocaine and opioids on the blood-brain
barrier, which could lead to treatments for problematic substance use and potentially utilizing the drugs' barrier-
migration mechanisms. Williams and her team have also developed an antibody capable of crossing the barrier to
kill HIV-infected cells. The promise of this work goes far beyond HIV, because these methods could be applied to
the wide array of diseases for which the blood-brain barrier inhibits treatment.
LINK TO LEARNING
View this video (https://www.openstax.org/l/22bldbrbarr) about the blood-brain barrier
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What is the primary function of the blood-brain barrier?
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1075 ===
26.1 • Anatomy of the Nervous System 1061
The Peripheral Nervous System
The PNS is formed of the nerves that connect organs, limbs, and other anatomic structures of the body to the brain
and spinal cord. Unlike the brain and spinal cord, the PNS is not protected by bone, meninges, or a blood barrier,
and, as a consequence, the nerves of the PNS are much more susceptible to injury and infection. Microbial damage
to peripheral nerves can lead to tingling or numbness known as neuropathy. These symptoms can also be produced
by trauma and noninfectious causes such as drugs or chronic diseases like diabetes.
The Cells of the Nervous System
Tissues of the PNS and CNS are formed of cells called glial cells (neuroglial cells) and neurons (nerve cells). Glial
cells assist in the organization of neurons, provide a scaffold for some aspects of neuronal function, and aid in
recovery from neural injury.
Neurons are specialized cells found throughout the nervous system that transmit signals through the nervous
system using electrochemical processes. The basic structure of a neuron is shown in Figure 26.4. The cell body (or
soma) is the metabolic center of the neuron and contains the nucleus and most of the cell’s organelles. The many
finely branched extensions from the soma are called dendrites. The soma also produces an elongated extension,
called the axon, which is responsible for the transmission of electrochemical signals through elaborate ion transport
processes. Axons of some types of neurons can extend up to one meter in length in the human body. To facilitate
electrochemical signal transmission, some neurons have a myelin sheath surrounding the axon. Myelin, formed
from the cell membranes of glial cells like the Schwann cells in the PNS and oligodendrocytes in the CNS, surrounds
and insulates the axon, significantly increasing the speed of electrochemical signal transmission along the axon. The
end of an axon forms numerous branches that end in bulbs called synaptic terminals. Neurons form junctions with
other cells, such as another neuron, with which they exchange signals. The junctions, which are actually gaps
between neurons, are referred to as synapses. At each synapse, there is a presynaptic neuron and a postsynaptic
neuron (or other cell). The synaptic terminals of the axon of the presynaptic terminal form the synapse with the
dendrites, soma, or sometimes the axon of the postsynaptic neuron, or a part of another type of cell such as a
muscle cell. The synaptic terminals contain vesicles filled with chemicals called neurotransmitters. When the
electrochemical signal moving down the axon reaches the synapse, the vesicles fuse with the membrane, and
neurotransmitters are released, which diffuse across the synapse and bind to receptors on the membrane of the
postsynaptic cell, potentially initiating a response in that cell. That response in the postsynaptic cell might include
further propagation of an electrochemical signal to transmit information or contraction of a muscle fiber.
FIGURE 26.4 (a) A myelinated neuron is associated with oligodendrocytes. Oligodendrocytes are a type of glial cell that forms the myelin
sheath in the CNS that insulates the axon so that electrochemical nerve impulses are transferred more efficiently. (b) A synapse consists of
the axonal end of the presynaptic neuron (top) that releases neurotransmitters that cross the synaptic space (or cleft) and bind to receptors
on dendrites of the postsynaptic neuron (bottom).
=== PDF PAGE 1076 ===
1062 26 • Nervous System Infections
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What cells are associated with neurons, and what is their function?
• What is the structure and function of a synapse?
Meningitis and Encephalitis
Although the skull provides the brain with an excellent defense, it can also become problematic during infections.
Any swelling of the brain or meninges that results from inflammation can cause intracranial pressure, leading to
severe damage of the brain tissues, which have limited space to expand within the inflexible bones of the skull. The
term meningitis is used to describe an inflammation of the meninges. Typical symptoms can include severe
headache, fever, photophobia (increased sensitivity to light), stiff neck, convulsions, and confusion. An inflammation
of brain tissue is called encephalitis, and patients exhibit signs and symptoms similar to those of meningitis in
addition to lethargy, seizures, and personality changes. When inflammation affects both the meninges and the brain
tissue, the condition is called meningoencephalitis. All three forms of inflammation are serious and can lead to
blindness, deafness, coma, and death.
Meningitis and encephalitis can be caused by many different types of microbial pathogens. However, these
conditions can also arise from noninfectious causes such as head trauma, some cancers, and certain drugs that
trigger inflammation. To determine whether the inflammation is caused by a pathogen, a lumbar puncture is
performed to obtain a sample of CSF. If the CSF contains increased levels of white blood cells and abnormal glucose
and protein levels, this indicates that the inflammation is a response to an infectioninflinin.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What are the two types of inflammation that can impact the CNS?
• Why do both forms of inflammation have such serious consequences?
MICRO CONNECTIONS
Guillain-Barré Syndrome
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is a rare condition that can be preceded by a viral or bacterial infection that results in
an autoimmune reaction against myelinated nerve cells. The destruction of the myelin sheath around these neurons
results in a loss of sensation and function. The first symptoms of this condition are tingling and weakness in the
affected tissues. The symptoms intensify over a period of several weeks and can culminate in complete paralysis.
Severe cases can be life-threatening. Infections by several different microbial pathogens, including Campylobacter
jejuni (the most common risk factor), cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, varicella-zoster virus, Mycoplasma
1 2
pneumoniae, and Zika virus have been identified as triggers for GBS. Anti-myelin antibodies from patients with
GBS have been demonstrated to also recognize C. jejuni. It is possible that cross-reactive antibodies, antibodies that
react with similar antigenic sites on different proteins, might be formed during an infection and may lead to this
autoimmune response.
GBS is solely identified by the appearance of clinical symptoms. There are no other diagnostic tests available.
Fortunately, most cases spontaneously resolve within a few months with few permanent effects, as there is no
available vaccine. GBS can be treated by plasmapheresis. In this procedure, the patient’s plasma is filtered from
their blood, removing autoantibodies.
1 Yuki, Nobuhiro and Hans-Peter Hartung, “Guillain–Barré Syndrome,” New England Journal of Medicine 366, no. 24 (2012): 2294-304.
2 Cao-Lormeau, Van-Mai, Alexandre Blake, Sandrine Mons, Stéphane Lastère, Claudine Roche, Jessica Vanhomwegen, Timothée Dub et
al., “Guillain-Barré Syndrome Outbreak Associated with Zika Virus Infection in French Polynesia: A Case-Control Study,” The Lancet 387,
no. 10027 (2016): 1531-9.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1077 ===
26.2 • Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous System 1063
26.2 Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the most common bacteria that can cause infections of the nervous system
• Compare the major characteristics of specific bacterial diseases affecting the nervous system
Bacterial infections that affect the nervous system are serious and can be life-threatening. Fortunately, there are
only a few bacterial species commonly associated with neurological infections.
Bacterial Meningitis
Bacterial meningitis is one of the most serious forms of meningitis. Bacteria that cause meningitis often gain
access to the CNS through the bloodstream after trauma or as a result of the action of bacterial toxins. Bacteria may
also spread from structures in the upper respiratory tract, such as the oropharynx, nasopharynx, sinuses, and
middle ear. Patients with head wounds or cochlear implants (an electronic device placed in the inner ear) are also at
risk for developing meningitis.
Many of the bacteria that can cause meningitis are commonly found in healthy people. The most common causes of
non-neonatal bacterial meningitis are Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Haemophilus
influenzae. All three of these bacterial pathogens are spread from person to person by respiratory secretions. Each
can colonize and cross through the mucous membranes of the oropharynx and nasopharynx, and enter the blood.
Once in the blood, these pathogens can disseminate throughout the body and are capable of both establishing an
infection and triggering inflammation in any body site, including the meninges (Figure 26.5). Without appropriate
systemic antibacterial therapy, the case-fatality rate can be as high as 70%, and 20% of those survivors may be left
with irreversible nerve damage or tissue destruction, resulting in hearing loss, neurologic disability, or loss of a limb.
Mortality rates are much lower (as low as 15%) in populations where appropriate therapeutic drugs and preventive
3
vaccines are available.
FIGURE 26.5 (a) A normal human brain removed during an autopsy. (b) The brain of a patient who died from bacterial meningitis. Note the
pus under the dura mater (being retracted by the forceps) and the red hemorrhagic foci on the meninges. (credit b: modification of work by
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
A variety of other bacteria, including Listeria monocytogenes and Escherichia coli, are also capable of causing
meningitis. These bacteria cause infections of the arachnoid mater and CSF after spreading through the circulation
in blood or by spreading from an infection of the sinuses or nasopharynx. Streptococcus agalactiae, commonly
found in the microbiota of the vagina and gastrointestinal tract, can also cause bacterial meningitis in newborns
after transmission either before or during birth.
The profound inflammation caused by these microbes can result in early symptoms that include severe headache,
fever, confusion, nausea, vomiting, photophobia, and stiff neck. Systemic inflammatory responses associated with
some types of bacterial meningitis can lead to hemorrhaging and purpuric lesions on skin, followed by even more
severe conditions that include shock, convulsions, coma, and death—in some cases, in the span of just a few hours.
3 Thigpen, Michael C., Cynthia G. Whitney, Nancy E. Messonnier, Elizabeth R. Zell, Ruth Lynfield, James L. Hadler, Lee H. Harrison et al.,
“Bacterial Meningitis in the United States, 1998–2007,” New England Journal of Medicine 364, no. 21 (2011): 2016-25.
=== PDF PAGE 1078 ===
1064 26 • Nervous System Infections
Diagnosis of bacterial meningitis is best confirmed by analysis of CSF obtained by a lumbar puncture. Abnormal
levels of polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) (> 10 PMNs/mm3), glucose (< 45 mg/dL), and protein (> 45 mg/dL)
4
in the CSF are suggestive of bacterial meningitis. Characteristics of specific forms of bacterial meningitis are
detailed in the subsections that follow.
Meningococcal Meningitis
Meningococcal meningitis is a serious infection caused by the gram-negative coccus N. meningitidis. In some
cases, death can occur within a few hours of the onset of symptoms. Nonfatal cases can result in irreversible nerve
damage, resulting in hearing loss and brain damage, or amputation of extremities because of tissue necrosis.
Meningococcal meningitis can infect people of any age, but its prevalence is highest among infants, adolescents,
5
and young adults. Meningococcal meningitis was once the most common cause of meningitis epidemics in human
populations. This is still the case in a swath of sub-Saharan Africa known as the meningitis belt, but meningococcal
meningitis epidemics have become rare in most other regions, thanks to meningococcal vaccines. However,
outbreaks can still occur in communities, schools, colleges, prisons, and other populations where people are in
close direct contact.
N. meningitidis has a high affinity for mucosal membranes in the oropharynx and nasopharynx. Contact with
respiratory secretions containing N. meningitidis is an effective mode of transmission. The pathogenicity of N.
meningitidis is enhanced by virulence factors that contribute to the rapid progression of the disease. These include
lipooligosaccharide (LOS) endotoxin, type IV pili for attachment to host tissues, and polysaccharide capsules that
help the cells avoid phagocytosis and complement-mediated killing. Additional virulence factors include IgA
protease (which breaks down IgA antibodies), the invasion factors Opa, Opc, and porin (which facilitate transcellular
entry through the blood-brain barrier), iron-uptake factors (which strip heme units from hemoglobin in host cells
and use them for growth), and stress proteins that protect bacteria from reactive oxygen molecules.
A unique sign of meningococcal meningitis is the formation of a petechial rash on the skin or mucous membranes,
characterized by tiny, red, flat, hemorrhagic lesions. This rash, which appears soon after disease onset, is a
response to LOS endotoxin and adherence virulence factors that disrupt the endothelial cells of capillaries and small
veins in the skin. The blood vessel disruption triggers the formation of tiny blood clots, causing blood to leak into the
surrounding tissue. As the infection progresses, the levels of virulence factors increase, and the hemorrhagic lesions
can increase in size as blood continues to leak into tissues. Lesions larger than 1.0 cm usually occur in patients
developing shock, as virulence factors cause increased hemorrhage and clot formation. Sepsis, as a result of
systemic damage from meningococcal virulence factors, can lead to rapid multiple organ failure, shock,
disseminated intravascular coagulation, and death.
Because meningococcoal meningitis progresses so rapidly, a greater variety of clinical specimens are required for
the timely detection of N. meningitidis. Required specimens can include blood, CSF, naso- and oropharyngeal
swabs, urethral and endocervical swabs, petechial aspirates, and biopsies. Safety protocols for handling and
transport of specimens suspected of containing N. meningitidis should always be followed, since cases of fatal
meningococcal disease have occurred in healthcare workers exposed to droplets or aerosols from patient
specimens. Prompt presumptive diagnosis of meningococcal meningitis can occur when CSF is directly evaluated by
Gram stain, revealing extra- and intracellular gram-negative diplococci with a distinctive coffee-bean microscopic
morphology associated with PMNs (Figure 26.6). Identification can also be made directly from CSF using latex
agglutination and immunochromatographic rapid diagnostic tests specific for N. meningitidis. Species identification
can also be performed using DNA sequence-based typing schemes for hypervariable outer membrane proteins of N.
meningitidis, which has replaced sero(sub)typing.
Meningococcal infections can be treated with antibiotic therapy, and third-generation cephalosporins are most often
employed. However, because outcomes can be negative even with treatment, preventive vaccination is the best
form of treatment. In 2010, countries in Africa’s meningitis belt began using a new serogroup A meningococcal
conjugate vaccine. This program has dramatically reduced the number of cases of meningococcal meningitis by
conferring individual and herd immunity.
4 Popovic, T., et al. World Health Organization, “Laboratory Manual for the Diagnosis of Meningitis Caused by Neisseria meningitidis,
Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Haemophilus influenza,” 1999.
5 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Meningococcal Disease,” August 5, 2015. Accessed June 28, 2015.
http://www.cdc.gov/meningococcal/surveillance/index.html.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1079 ===
26.2 • Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous System 1065
Twelve different capsular serotypes of N. meningitidis are known to exist. Serotypes A, B, C, W, X, and Y are the
most prevalent worldwide. The CDC recommends that children between 11–12 years of age be vaccinated with a
6
single dose of a quadrivalent vaccine that protects against serotypes A, C, W, and Y, with a booster at age 16. An
additional booster or injections of serogroup B meningococcal vaccine may be given to individuals in high-risk
settings (such as epidemic outbreaks on college campuses).
FIGURE 26.6 N. meningitidis (arrows) associated with neutrophils (the larger stained cells) in a gram-stained CSF sample. (credit:
modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
MICRO CONNECTIONS
Meningitis on Campus
College students living in dorms or communal housing are at increased risk for contracting epidemic meningitis.
From 2011 to 2015, there have been at least nine meningococcal outbreaks on college campuses in the United
7
States. These incidents involved a total of 43 students (of whom four died). In spite of rapid diagnosis and
aggressive antimicrobial treatment, several of the survivors suffered from amputations or serious neurological
problems.
Prophylactic vaccination of first-year college students living in dorms is recommended by the CDC, and insurance
companies now cover meningococcal vaccination for students in college dorms. Some colleges have mandated
vaccination with meningococcal conjugate vaccine for certain students entering college (Figure 26.7).
FIGURE 26.7 To prevent campus outbreaks, some colleges now require students to be vaccinated against meningogoccal meningitis.
(credit: modification of work by James Gathany, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Pneumococcal Meningitis
Pneumococcal meningitis is caused by the encapsulated gram-positive bacterium S. pneumoniae (pneumococcus,
6 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Recommended Immunization Schedule for Persons Aged 0 Through 18 Years, United
States, 2016,” February 1, 2016. Accessed on June 28, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/imz/child-adolescent.html.
7 National Meningitis Association, “Serogroup B Meningococcal Disease Outbreaks on U.S. College Campuses,” 2016. Accessed June 28,
2016. http://www.nmaus.org/disease-prevention-information/serogroup-b-meningococcal-disease/outbreaks/.
=== PDF PAGE 1080 ===
1066 26 • Nervous System Infections
also called strep pneumo). This organism is commonly found in the microbiota of the pharynx of 30–70% of young
children, depending on the sampling method, while S. pneumoniae can be found in fewer than 5% of healthy adults.
Although it is often present without disease symptoms, this microbe can cross the blood-brain barrier in susceptible
individuals. In some cases, it may also result in septicemia. Since the introduction of the Hib vaccine, S. pneumoniae
has become the leading cause of meningitis in humans aged 2 months through adulthood.
S. pneumoniae can be identified in CSF samples using gram-stained specimens, latex agglutination, and
immunochromatographic RDT specific for S. pneumoniae. In gram-stained samples, S. pneumoniae appears as
gram-positive, lancet-shaped diplococci (Figure 26.8). Identification of S. pneumoniae can also be achieved using
cultures of CSF and blood, and at least 93 distinct serotypes can be identified based on the quellung reaction to
unique capsular polysaccharides. PCR and RT-PCR assays are also available to confirm identification.
Major virulence factors produced by S. pneumoniae include PI-1 pilin for adherence to host cells (pneumococcal
adherence) and virulence factor B (PavB) for attachment to cells of the respiratory tract; choline-binding proteins
(cbpA) that bind to epithelial cells and interfere with immune factors IgA and C3; and the cytoplasmic bacterial toxin
pneumolysin that triggers an inflammatory response.
With the emergence of drug-resistant strains of S. pneumoniae, pneumococcal meningitis is typically treated with
broad-spectrum antibiotics, such as levofloxacin, cefotaxime, penicillin, or other β-lactam antibiotics. The two
available pneumococcal vaccines are described in Bacterial Infections of the Respiratory Tract.
FIGURE 26.8 (a) Digitally colorized fluorescent antibody stained micrograph of Streptococcus pneumoniae in CSF. (b) S. pneumoniae
growing on blood agar. (credit a: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by
Nathan Reading)
Haemophilus influenzae Type b
Meningitis due to H. influenzae serotype b (Hib), an encapsulated pleomorphic gram-negative coccobacilli, is now
uncommon in most countries, because of the use of the effective Hib vaccine. Without the use of the Hib vaccine, H.
influenzae can be the primary cause of meningitis in children 2 months thru 5 years of age. H. influenzae can be
found in the throats of healthy individuals, including infants and young children. By five years of age, most children
have developed immunity to this microbe. Infants older than 2 months of age, however, do not produce a sufficient
protective antibody response and are susceptible to serious disease. The intracranial pressure caused by this
8
infection leads to a 5% mortality rate and 20% incidence of deafness or brain damage in survivors.
H. influenzae produces at least 16 different virulence factors, including LOS, which triggers inflammation, and
Haemophilus adhesion and penetration factor (Hap), which aids in attachment and invasion into respiratory
epithelial cells. The bacterium also has a polysaccharide capsule that helps it avoid phagocytosis, as well as factors
such as IgA1 protease and P2 protein that allow it to evade antibodies secreted from mucous membranes. In
addition, factors such as hemoglobin-binding protein (Hgp) and transferrin-binding protein (Tbp) acquire iron from
hemoglobin and transferrin, respectively, for bacterial growth.
Preliminary diagnosis of H. influenzae infections can be made by direct PCR and a smear of CSF. Stained smears will
8 United States Department of Health and Human Services, “Hib (Haemophilus Influenzae Type B),” Accessed June 28, 2016.
http://www.vaccines.gov/diseases/hib/#.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1081 ===
26.2 • Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous System 1067
reveal intracellular and extracellular PMNs with small, pleomorphic, gram-negative coccobacilli or filamentous
forms that are characteristic of H. influenzae. Initial confirmation of this genus can be based on its fastidious growth
on chocolate agar. Identification is confirmed with requirements for exogenous biochemical growth cofactors NAD
and heme (by MALDI-TOF), latex agglutination, and RT-PCR.
Meningitis caused by H. influenzae is usually treated with doxycycline, fluoroquinolones, second- and third-
generation cephalosporins, and carbapenems. The best means of preventing H. influenza infection is with the use of
the Hib polysaccharide conjugate vaccine. It is recommended that all children receive this vaccine at 2, 4, and 6
9
months of age, with a final booster dose at 12 to 15 months of age.
Neonatal Meningitis
S. agalactiae, Group B streptococcus (GBS), is an encapsulated gram-positive bacterium that is the most common
10
cause of neonatal meningitis, a term that refers to meningitis occurring in babies up to 3 months of age. S.
agalactiae can also cause meningitis in people of all ages and can be found in the urogenital and gastrointestinal
microbiota of about 10–30% of humans.
Neonatal infection occurs as either early onset or late-onset disease. Early onset disease is defined as occurring in
infants up to 7 days old. The infant initially becomes infected by S. agalactiae during childbirth, when the bacteria
may be transferred from the vagina during birth. Incidence of early onset neonatal meningitis can be greatly reduced
by giving intravenous antibiotics to a person giving birth.
Late-onset neonatal meningitis occurs in infants between 1 week and 3 months of age. Infants born to people with
S. agalactiae in the urogenital tract have a higher risk of late-onset menigitis, but late-onset infections can be
transmitted from several sources; often, the source of infection is unknown. Infants who are born prematurely
(before 37 weeks of pregnancy) or to people who develop a fever also have a greater risk of contracting late-onset
neonatal meningitis.
Signs and symptoms of early onset disease include temperature instability, apnea (cessation of breathing),
bradycardia (slow heart rate), hypotension, difficulty feeding, irritability, and limpness. When asleep, the baby may
be difficult to wake up. Symptoms of late-onset disease are more likely to include seizures, bulging fontanel (soft
spot), stiff neck, hemiparesis (weakness on one side of the body), and opisthotonos (rigid body with arched back
and head thrown backward).
S. agalactiae produces at least 12 virulence factors that include FbsA that attaches to host cell surface proteins,
PI-1 pili that promotes the invasion of human endothelial cells, a polysaccharide capsule that prevents the
activation of the alternative complement pathway and inhibits phagocytosis, and the toxin CAMP factor, which forms
pores in host cell membranes and binds to IgG and IgM antibodies.
Diagnosis of neonatal meningitis is often, but not uniformly, confirmed by positive results from cultures of CSF or
blood. Tests include routine culture, antigen detection by enzyme immunoassay, serotyping of different capsule
types, PCR, and RT-PCR. It is typically treated with β-lactam antibiotics such as intravenous penicillin or ampicillin
11
plus gentamicin. Even with treatment, roughly 10% mortality is seen in infected neonates.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Which groups are most vulnerable to each of the bacterial meningitis diseases?
• For which of the bacterial meningitis diseases are there vaccines presently available?
• Which organism can cause epidemic meningitis?
9 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Meningococcal Disease, Disease Trends,” 2015. Accessed September 13, 2016.
http://www.cdc.gov/meningococcal/surveillance/index.html.
10 Thigpen, Michael C., Cynthia G. Whitney, Nancy E. Messonnier, Elizabeth R. Zell, Ruth Lynfield, James L. Hadler, Lee H. Harrison et al.,
“Bacterial Meningitis in the United States, 1998–2007,” New England Journal of Medicine 364, no. 21 (2011): 2016-25.
11 Thigpen, Michael C., Cynthia G. Whitney, Nancy E. Messonnier, Elizabeth R. Zell, Ruth Lynfield, James L. Hadler, Lee H. Harrison et al.,
“Bacterial Meningitis in the United States, 1998–2007,” New England Journal of Medicine 364, no. 21 (2011): 2016-25; Heath, Paul T., Gail
Balfour, Abbie M. Weisner, Androulla Efstratiou, Theresa L. Lamagni, Helen Tighe, Liam AF O’Connell et al., “Group B Streptococcal Disease
in UK and Irish Infants Younger than 90 Days,” The Lancet 363, no. 9405 (2004): 292-4.
=== PDF PAGE 1082 ===
1068 26 • Nervous System Infections
Clostridium-Associated Diseases
Species in the genus Clostridium are gram-positive, endospore-forming rods that are obligate anaerobes.
Endospores of Clostridium spp. are widespread in nature, commonly found in soil, water, feces, sewage, and marine
sediments. Clostridium spp. produce more types of protein exotoxins than any other bacterial genus, including two
exotoxins with protease activity that are the most potent known biological toxins: botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT) and
tetanus neurotoxin (TeNT). These two toxins have lethal doses of 0.2–10 ng per kg body weight.
BoNT can be produced by unique strains of C. butyricum, and C. baratii; however, it is primarily associated with C.
botulinum and the condition of botulism. TeNT, which causes tetanus, is only produced by C. tetani. These powerful
neural exotoxins are the primary virulence factors for these pathogens. The mode of action for these toxins was
described in Virulence Factors of Bacterial and Viral Pathogens and illustrated in Figure 15.16.
Diagnosis of tetanus or botulism typically involves bioassays that detect the presence of BoNT and TeNT in fecal
specimens, blood (serum), or suspect foods. In addition, both C. botulinum and C. tetani can be isolated and
cultured using commercially available media for anaerobes. ELISA and RT-PCR tests are also available.
Tetanus
Tetanus is a noncommunicable disease characterized by uncontrollable muscle spasms (contractions) caused by
the action of TeNT. It generally occurs when C. tetani infects a wound and produces TeNT, which rapidly binds to
neural tissue, resulting in an intoxication (poisoning) of neurons. Depending on the site and extent of infection, cases
of tetanus can be described as localized, cephalic, or generalized. Generalized tetanus that occurs in a newborn is
called neonatal tetanus.
Localized tetanus occurs when TeNT only affects the muscle groups close to the injury site. There is no CNS
involvement, and the symptoms are usually mild, with localized muscle spasms caused by a dysfunction in the
surrounding neurons. Individuals with partial immunity—especially previously vaccinated individuals who neglect to
get the recommended booster shots—are most likely to develop localized tetanus as a result of C. tetani infecting a
puncture wound.
Cephalic tetanus is a rare, localized form of tetanus generally associated with wounds on the head or face. In rare
cases, it has occurred in cases of otitis media (middle ear infection). Cephalic tetanus often results in patients
seeing double images, because of the spasms affecting the muscles that control eye movement.
Both localized and cephalic tetanus may progress to generalized tetanus—a much more serious condition—if TeNT is
able to spread further into body tissues. In generalized tetanus, TeNT enters neurons of the PNS. From there, TeNT
travels from the site of the wound, usually on an extremity of the body, retrograde (back up) to inhibitory neurons in
the CNS. There, it prevents the release of gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), the neurotransmitter responsible for
muscle relaxation. The resulting muscle spasms often first occur in the jaw muscles, leading to the characteristic
symptom of lockjaw (inability to open the mouth). As the toxin progressively continues to block neurotransmitter
release, other muscles become involved, resulting in uncontrollable, sudden muscle spasms that are powerful
enough to cause tendons to rupture and bones to fracture. Spasms in the muscles in the neck, back, and legs may
cause the body to form a rigid, stiff arch, a posture called opisthotonos (Figure 26.9). Spasms in the larynx,
diaphragm, and muscles of the chest restrict the patient’s ability to swallow and breathe, eventually leading to
death by asphyxiation (insufficient supply of oxygen).
Neonatal tetanus typically occurs when the stump of the umbilical cord is contaminated with spores of C. tetani
after delivery. Although this condition is rare in the United States, neonatal tetanus is a major cause of infant
mortality in countries that lack maternal immunization for tetanus and where birth often occurs in unsanitary
conditions. At the end of the first week of life, infected infants become irritable, feed poorly, and develop rigidity
12
with spasms. Neonatal tetanus has a very poor prognosis with a mortality rate of 70%–100%.
Treatment for patients with tetanus includes assisted breathing through the use of a ventilator, wound debridement,
fluid balance, and antibiotic therapy with metronidazole or penicillin to halt the growth of C. tetani. In addition,
patients are treated with TeNT antitoxin, preferably in the form of human immunoglobulin to neutralize nonfixed
toxin and benzodiazepines to enhance the effect of GABA for muscle relaxation and anxiety.
12 UNFPA, UNICEF WHO, “Maternal and Neonatal Tetanus Elimination by 2005,” 2000. http://www.unicef.org/immunization/files/
MNTE_strategy_paper.pdf.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1083 ===
26.2 • Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous System 1069
A tetanus toxoid (TT) vaccine is available for protection and prevention of tetanus. It is the T component of vaccines
such as DTaP, Tdap, and Td. The CDC recommends children receive doses of the DTaP vaccine at 2, 4, 6, and 15–18
months of age and another at 4–6 years of age. One dose of Td is recommended for adolescents and adults as a TT
13
booster every 10 years.
FIGURE 26.9 A tetanus patient exhibiting the rigid body posture known as opisthotonos. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)
Botulism
Botulism is a rare but frequently fatal illness caused by intoxication by BoNT. It can occur either as the result of an
infection by C. botulinum, in which case the bacteria produce BoNT in vivo, or as the result of a direct introduction of
BoNT into tissues.
Infection and production of BoNT in vivo can result in wound botulism, infant botulism, and adult intestinal toxemia.
Wound botulism typically occurs when C. botulinum is introduced directly into a wound after a traumatic injury, deep
puncture wound, or injection site. Infant botulism, which occurs in infants younger than 1 year of age, and adult
intestinal toxemia, which occurs in immunocompromised adults, results from ingesting C. botulinum endospores in
food. The endospores germinate in the body, resulting in the production of BoNT in the intestinal tract.
Intoxications occur when BoNT is produced outside the body and then introduced directly into the body through
food (foodborne botulism), air (inhalation botulism), or a clinical procedure (iatrogenic botulism). Foodborne
botulism, the most common of these forms, occurs when BoNT is produced in contaminated food and then ingested
along with the food (recall Case in Point: A Streak of Bad Potluck). Inhalation botulism is rare because BoNT is
unstable as an aerosol and does not occur in nature; however, it can be produced in the laboratory and was used
(unsuccessfully) as a bioweapon by terrorists in Japan in the 1990s. A few cases of accidental inhalation botulism
have also occurred. Iatrogenic botulism is also rare; it is associated with injections of BoNT used for cosmetic
purposes (see Micro Connections: Medicinal Uses of Botulinum Toxin).
When BoNT enters the bloodstream in the gastrointestinal tract, wound, or lungs, it is transferred to the
neuromuscular junctions of motor neurons where it binds irreversibly to presynaptic membranes and prevents the
release of acetylcholine from the presynaptic terminal of motor neurons into the neuromuscular junction. The
consequence of preventing acetylcholine release is the loss of muscle activity, leading to muscle relaxation and
eventually paralysis.
If BoNT is absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract, early symptoms of botulism include blurred vision, drooping
eyelids, difficulty swallowing, abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, constipation, or possibly diarrhea. This is
followed by progressive flaccid paralysis, a gradual weakening and loss of control over the muscles. A patient’s
experience can be particularly terrifying, because hearing remains normal, consciousness is not lost, and they are
fully aware of the progression of their condition. In infants, notable signs of botulism include weak cry, decreased
ability to suckle, and hypotonia (limpness of head or body). Eventually, botulism ends in death from respiratory
failure caused by the progressive paralysis of the muscles of the upper airway, diaphragm, and chest.
13 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Tetanus Vaccination,” 2013. Accessed June 29, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/tetanus/
vaccination.html.
=== PDF PAGE 1084 ===
1070 26 • Nervous System Infections
Botulism is treated with an antitoxin specific for BoNT. If administered in time, the antitoxin stops the progression of
paralysis but does not reverse it. Once the antitoxin has been administered, the patient will slowly regain
neurological function, but this may take several weeks or months, depending on the severity of the case. During
recovery, patients generally must remain hospitalized and receive breathing assistance through a ventilator.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How frequently should the tetanus vaccination be updated in adults?
• What are the most common causes of botulism?
• Why is botulism not treated with an antibiotic?
MICRO CONNECTIONS
Medicinal Uses of Botulinum Toxin
Although it is the most toxic biological material known to man, botulinum toxin is often intentionally injected into
people to treat other conditions. Type A botulinum toxin is used cosmetically to reduce wrinkles. The injection of
minute quantities of this toxin into the face causes the relaxation of facial muscles, thereby giving the skin a
smoother appearance. Eyelid twitching and crossed eyes can also be treated with botulinum toxin injections. Other
uses of this toxin include the treatment of hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating). In fact, botulinum toxin can be used
to moderate the effects of several other apparently nonmicrobial diseases involving inappropriate nerve function.
Such diseases include cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, and Parkinson’s disease. Each of these diseases is
characterized by a loss of control over muscle contractions; treatment with botulinum toxin serves to relax
contracted muscles.
Listeriosis
Listeria monocytogenes is a nonencapsulated, nonsporulating, gram-positive rod and a foodborne pathogen that
causes listeriosis. At-risk groups include pregnant people, neonates, the elderly, and the immunocompromised
(recall the Clinical Focus case studies in Microbial Growth and Microbial Mechanisms of Pathogenicity). Listeriosis
leads to meningitis in about 20% of cases, particularly neonates and patients over the age of 60. The CDC identifies
14
listeriosis as the third leading cause of death due to foodborne illness, with overall mortality rates reaching 16%.
Listeriosis can cause also cause spontaneous abortion in pregnant people because of the pathogen’s unique ability
to cross the placenta.
L. monocytogenes is generally introduced into food items by contamination with soil or animal manure used as
fertilizer. Foods commonly associated with listeriosis include fresh fruits and vegetables, frozen vegetables,
15
processed meats, soft cheeses, and raw milk. Unlike most other foodborne pathogens, Listeria is able to grow at
temperatures between 0 °C and 50 °C, and can therefore continue to grow, even in refrigerated foods.
Ingestion of contaminated food leads initially to infection of the gastrointestinal tract. However, L. monocytogenes
produces several unique virulence factors that allow it to cross the intestinal barrier and spread to other body
systems. Surface proteins called internalins (InlA and InlB) help L. monocytogenes invade nonphagocytic cells and
tissues, penetrating the intestinal wall and becoming disseminating through the circulatory and lymphatic systems.
Internalins also enable L. monocytogenes to breach other important barriers, including the blood-brain barrier and
the placenta. Within tissues, L. monocytogenes uses other proteins called listeriolysin O and ActA to facilitate
intercellular movement, allowing the infection to spread from cell to cell (Figure 26.10).
L. monocytogenes is usually identified by cultivation of samples from a normally sterile site (e.g., blood or CSF).
Recovery of viable organisms can be enhanced using cold enrichment by incubating samples in a broth at 4 °C for a
week or more. Distinguishing types and subtypes of L. monocytogenes—an important step for diagnosis and
14 Scallan, Elaine, Robert M. Hoekstra, Frederick J. Angulo, Robert V. Tauxe, Marc-Alain Widdowson, Sharon L. Roy, Jeffery L. Jones, and
Patricia M. Griffin, “Foodborne Illness Acquired in the United States—Major Pathogens,” Emerging Infectious Diseases 17, no. 1 (2011):
7-15.
15 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Listeria Outbreaks,” 2016. Accessed June 29, 2016. https://www.cdc.gov/listeria/
outbreaks/index.html.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1085 ===
26.2 • Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous System 1071
epidemiology—is typically done using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Identification can also be achieved using
chemiluminescence DNA probe assays and MALDI-TOF.
Treatment for listeriosis involves antibiotic therapy, most commonly with ampicillin and gentamicin. There is no
vaccine available.
FIGURE 26.10 (a) An electron micrograph of Listeria monocytogenes infecting a host cell. (b) Listeria is able to use host cell components to
cause infection. For example, phagocytosis allows it to enter host cells, and the host’s cytoskeleton provides the materials to help the
pathogen move to other cells. (credit a: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of
work by Keith Ireton)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How does Listeria enter the nervous system?
Hansen’s Disease (Leprosy)
Hansen’s disease (also known as leprosy) is caused by a long, thin, filamentous rod-shaped bacterium
Mycobacterium leprae, an obligate intracellular pathogen. M. leprae is classified as gram-positive bacteria, but it is
best visualized microscopically with an acid-fast stain and is generally referred to as an acid-fast bacterium.
Hansen’s disease affects the PNS, leading to permanent damage and loss of appendages or other body parts.
Hansen’s disease is communicable but not highly contagious; approximately 95% of the human population cannot
be easily infected because they have a natural immunity to M. leprae. Person-to-person transmission occurs by
inhalation into nasal mucosa or prolonged and repeated contact with infected skin. Armadillos, one of only five
16
mammals susceptible to Hansen’s disease, have also been implicated in transmission of some cases.
In the human body, M. leprae grows best at the cooler temperatures found in peripheral tissues like the nose, toes,
fingers, and ears. Some of the virulence factors that contribute to M. leprae’s pathogenicity are located on the
capsule and cell wall of the bacterium. These virulence factors enable it to bind to and invade Schwann cells,
resulting in progressive demyelination that gradually destroys neurons of the PNS. The loss of neuronal function
leads to hypoesthesia (numbness) in infected lesions. M. leprae is readily phagocytized by macrophages but is able
to survive within macrophages in part by neutralizing reactive oxygen species produced in the oxidative burst of the
phagolysosome. Like L. monocytogenes, M. leprae also can move directly between macrophages to avoid clearance
by immune factors.
16 Sharma, Rahul, Pushpendra Singh, W. J. Loughry, J. Mitchell Lockhart, W. Barry Inman, Malcolm S. Duthie, Maria T. Pena et al.,
“Zoonotic Leprosy in the Southeastern United States,” Emerging Infectious Diseases 21, no. 12 (2015): 2127-34.
=== PDF PAGE 1086 ===
1072 26 • Nervous System Infections
The extent of the disease is related to the immune response of the patient. Initial symptoms may not appear for as
long as 2 to 5 years after infection. These often begin with small, blanched, numb areas of the skin. In most
individuals, these will resolve spontaneously, but some cases may progress to a more serious form of the disease.
Tuberculoid (paucibacillary) Hansen’s disease is marked by the presence of relatively few (three or less) flat,
blanched skin lesions with small nodules at the edges and few bacteria present in the lesion. Although these lesions
can persist for years or decades, the bacteria are held in check by an effective immune response including cell-
mediated cytotoxicity. Individuals who are unable to contain the infection may later develop lepromatous
(multibacillary) Hansen’s disease. This is a progressive form of the disease characterized by nodules filled with acid-
fast bacilli and macrophages. Impaired function of infected Schwann cells leads to peripheral nerve damage,
resulting in sensory loss that leads to ulcers, deformities, and fractures. Damage to the ulnar nerve (in the wrist) by
M. leprae is one of the most common causes of crippling of the hand. In some cases, chronic tissue damage can
ultimately lead to loss of fingers or toes. When mucosal tissues are also involved, disfiguring lesions of the nose and
face can also occur (Figure 26.11).
Hansen’s disease is diagnosed on the basis of clinical signs and symptoms of the disease, and confirmed by the
presence of acid-fast bacilli on skin smears or in skin biopsy specimens (Figure 26.11). M. leprae does not grow in
vitro on any known laboratory media, but it can be identified by culturing in vivo in the footpads of laboratory mice or
armadillos. Where needed, PCR and genotyping of M. leprae DNA in infected human tissue may be performed for
diagnosis and epidemiology. Chemist Alice Ball, at the relatively young age of 23, developed the first effective
method for treating Hansen's disease. Oil from the chaulmoogra tree had been shown to impact the disease, but the
substance was extremely thick and viscous, rendering it unusable as an injectable treatment. Ball recognized that
the oil's ester compounds were critical to counteracting the bacteria, so she created a method to isolate the esters
using alcohol, and after further manipulation created a water soluble version. Ball unfortunately passed away a year
later, and the university president fraudulently published her work as his own; however, a local surgeon who had
collaborated with Ball repudiated those claims. The "Ball Method" was used to create the first widely effective
treatments, and the chaulmoogra-based medicine was the primary global treatment for leprosy until sulfone
therapies were developed in the 1940s.
Hansen’s disease responds well to treatment and, if diagnosed and treated early, does not cause disability. In the
United States, most patients with Hansen’s disease are treated in ambulatory care clinics in major cities by the
National Hansen’s Disease program, the only institution in the United States exclusively devoted to Hansen’s
disease. Since 1995, WHO has made multidrug therapy for Hansen’s disease available free of charge to all patients
worldwide. As a result, global prevalence of Hansen’s disease has declined from about 5.2 million cases in 1985 to
17
roughly 176,000 in 2014. Multidrug therapy consists of dapsone and rifampicin for all patients and a third drug,
clofazimin, for patients with multibacillary disease.
Currently, there is no universally accepted vaccine for Hansen’s disease. India and Brazil use a tuberculosis vaccine
against Hansen’s disease because both diseases are caused by species of Mycobacterium. The effectiveness of this
method is questionable, however, since it appears that the vaccine works in some populations but not in others.
FIGURE 26.11 (a) The nose of a patient with Hansen’s disease. Note the lepromatous/multibacillary lesions around the nostril. (b) Hansen’s
17 World Health Organization, “Leprosy Fact Sheet,” 2016. Accessed September 13, 2016. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/
fs101/en/.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1087 ===
26.2 • Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous System 1073
disease is caused by Mycobacterium leprae, a gram-positive bacillus. (credit a, b: modifications of work by the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What prevents the progression from tuberculoid to lepromatus leprosy?
• Why does Hansen’s disease typically affect the nerves of the extremities?
EYE ON ETHICS
Leper Colonies
Disfiguring, deadly diseases like leprosy have historically been stigmatized in many cultures. Before leprosy was
understood, victims were often isolated in leper colonies, a practice mentioned frequently in ancient texts,
including the Bible. But leper colonies are not just an artifact of the ancient world. In Hawaii, a leper colony
established in the late nineteenth century persisted until the mid-twentieth century, its residents forced to live
18
in deplorable conditions. Although leprosy is a communicable disease, it is not considered contagious (easily
communicable), and it certainly does not pose enough of a threat to justify the permanent isolation of its victims.
Today, we reserve the practices of isolation and quarantine to patients with more dangerous diseases, such as
Ebola or multiple-drug-resistant bacteria like Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Staphylococcus aureus. The
ethical argument for this practice is that isolating infected patients is necessary to prevent the transmission and
spread of highly contagious diseases—even when it goes against the wishes of the patient.
Of course, it is much easier to justify the practice of temporary, clinical quarantining than permanent social
segregation, as occurred in leper colonies. In the 1980s, there were calls by some groups to establish camps for
people infected with AIDS. Although this idea was never actually implemented, it begs the question—where do
we draw the line? Are permanent isolation camps or colonies ever medically or socially justifiable? Suppose
there were an outbreak of a fatal, contagious disease for which there is no treatment. Would it be justifiable to
impose social isolation on those afflicted with the disease? How would we balance the rights of the infected with
the risk they pose to others? To what extent should society expect individuals to put their own health at risk for
the sake of treating others humanely?
DISEASE PROFILE
Bacterial Infections of the Nervous System
Despite the formidable defenses protecting the nervous system, a number of bacterial pathogens are known to
cause serious infections of the CNS or PNS. Unfortunately, these infections are often serious and life
threatening. Figure 26.12 summarizes some important infections of the nervous system.
18 National Park Service, “A Brief History of Kalaupapa,” Accessed February 2, 2016. http://www.nps.gov/kala/learn/historyculture/a-
brief-history-of-kalaupapa.htm.
=== PDF PAGE 1088 ===
1074 26 • Nervous System Infections
FIGURE 26.12
26.3 Acellular Diseases of the Nervous System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the most common acellular pathogens that can cause infections of the nervous system
• Compare the major characteristics of specific viral diseases affecting the nervous system
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1089 ===
26.3 • Acellular Diseases of the Nervous System 1075
A number of different viruses and subviral particles can cause diseases that affect the nervous system. Viral
diseases tend to be more common than bacterial infections of the nervous system today. Fortunately, viral infections
are generally milder than their bacterial counterparts and often spontaneously resolve. Some of the more important
acellular pathogens of the nervous system are described in this section.
Viral Meningitis
Although it is much more common than bacterial meningitis, viral meningitis is typically less severe. Many different
viruses can lead to meningitis as a sequela of the primary infection, including those that cause herpes, influenza,
measles, and mumps. Most cases of viral meningitis spontaneously resolve, but severe cases do occur.
Arboviral Encephalitis
Several types of insect-borne viruses can cause encephalitis. Collectively, these viruses are referred to as
arboviruses (because they are arthropod-borne), and the diseases they cause are described as arboviral
encephalitis. Most arboviruses are endemic to specific geographical regions. Arborviral encephalitis diseases found
in the United States include eastern equine encephalitis (EEE), western equine encephalitis (WEE), St. Louis
encephalitis, and West Nile encephalitis (WNE). Expansion of arboviruses beyond their endemic regions sometimes
occurs, generally as a result of environmental changes that are favorable to the virus or its vector. Increased travel
of infected humans, animals, or vectors has also allowed arboviruses to spread into new regions.
In most cases, arboviral infections are asymptomatic or lead to a mild disease. However, when symptoms do occur,
they include high fever, chills, headaches, vomiting, diarrhea, and restlessness. In elderly patients, severe arboviral
encephalitis can rapidly lead to convulsions, coma, and death.
Mosquitoes are the most common biological vectors for arboviruses, which tend to be enveloped ssRNA viruses.
Thus, prevention of arboviral infections is best achieved by avoiding mosquitoes—using insect repellent, wearing
long pants and sleeves, sleeping in well-screened rooms, using bed nets, etc.
Diagnosis of arboviral encephalitis is based on clinical symptoms and serologic testing of serum or CSF. There are no
antiviral drugs to treat any of these arboviral diseases, so treatment consists of supportive care and management of
symptoms.
Eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) is caused by eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV), which can cause severe
disease in horses and humans. Birds are reservoirs for EEEV with accidental transmission to horses and humans by
Aedes, Coquillettidia, and Culex species of mosquitoes. Neither horses nor humans serve as reservoirs. EEE is most
common in US Gulf Coast and Atlantic states. EEE is one of the more severe mosquito-transmitted diseases in the
1920
United States, but fortunately, it is a very rare disease in the United States (Figure 26.13).
Western equine encephalitis (WEE) is caused by western equine encephalitis virus (WEEV). WEEV is usually
transmitted to horses and humans by the Culex tarsalis mosquitoes and, in the past decade, has caused very few
cases of encephalitis in humans in the United States. In humans, WEE symptoms are less severe than EEE and
include fever, chills, and vomiting, with a mortality rate of 3–4%. Like EEEV, birds are the natural reservoir for WEEV.
Periodically, for indeterminate reasons, epidemics in human cases have occurred in North America in the past. The
21
largest on record was in 1941, with more than 3400 cases.
19 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus Disease Cases and Deaths Reported to CDC by Year
and Clinical Presentation, 2004–2013,” 2014. http://www.cdc.gov/EasternEquineEncephalitis/resources/EEEV-Cases-by-
Year_2004-2013.pdf.
20 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Eastern Equine Encephalitis, Symptoms & Treatment, 2016,” Accessed June 29,
2016. https://www.cdc.gov/easternequineencephalitis/tech/symptoms.html.
21 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Western Equine Encephalitis—United States and Canada, 1987,” Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report 36, no. 39 (1987): 655.
=== PDF PAGE 1090 ===
1076 26 • Nervous System Infections
FIGURE 26.13 (a) A false color TEM of a mosquito salivary gland cell shows an infection of the eastern equine encephalitis virus (red). (b)
CT (left) and MRI (right) scans of the brains of children with eastern equine encephalitis infections, showing abnormalities (arrows)
resulting from the infection. (credit a, b: modifications of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
St. Louis encephalitis (SLE), caused by St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV), is a rare form of encephalitis with
symptoms occurring in fewer than 1% of infected patients. The natural reservoirs for SLEV are birds. SLEV is most
often found in the Ohio-Mississippi River basin of the central United States and was named after a severe outbreak
in Missouri in 1934. The worst outbreak of St. Louis encephalitis occurred in 1975, with over 2000 cases
22
reported. Humans become infected when bitten by C. tarsalis, C. quinquefasciatus, or C. pipiens mosquitoes
carrying SLEV. Most patients are asymptomatic, but in a small number of individuals, symptoms range from mild flu-
23
like syndromes to fatal encephalitis. The overall mortality rate for symptomatic patients is 5–15%.
Japanese encephalitis, caused by Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), is the leading cause of vaccine-preventable
encephalitis in humans and is endemic to some of the most populous countries in the world, including China, India,
Japan, and all of Southeast Asia. JEV is transmitted to humans by Culex mosquitoes, usually the species C.
tritaeniorhynchus. The biological reservoirs for JEV include pigs and wading birds. Most patients with JEV infections
are asymptomatic, with symptoms occurring in fewer than 1% of infected individuals. However, about 25% of those
who do develop encephalitis die, and among those who recover, 30–50% have psychiatric, neurologic, or cognitive
24
impairment. Fortunately, there is an effective vaccine that can prevent infection with JEV. The CDC recommends
this vaccine for travelers who expect to spend more than one month in endemic areas.
As the name suggests, West Nile virus (WNV) and its associated disease, West Nile encephalitis (WNE), did not
originate in North America. Until 1999, it was endemic in the Middle East, Africa, and Asia; however, the first US
cases were identified in New York in 1999, and by 2004, the virus had spread across the entire continental United
States. Over 35,000 cases, including 1400 deaths, were confirmed in the five-year period between 1999 and 2004.
WNV infection remains reportable to the CDC.
WNV is transmitted to humans by Culex mosquitoes from its natural reservoir, infected birds, with 70–80% of
infected patients experiencing no symptoms. Most symptomatic cases involve only mild, flu-like symptoms, but
fewer than 1% of infected people develop severe and sometimes fatal encephalitis or meningitis. The mortality rate
in WNV patients who develop neurological disease is about 10%. More information about West Nile virus can be
found in Modes of Disease Transmission.
22 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Saint Louis encephalitis, Epidemiology & Geographic Distribution,” Accessed June 30,
2016. http://www.cdc.gov/sle/technical/epi.html.
23 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Saint Louis encephalitis, Symptoms and Treatment,” Accessed June 30, 2016.
http://www.cdc.gov/sle/technical/symptoms.html.
24 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Japanese Encephalitis, Symptoms and Treatment,” Accessed June 30, 2016.
http://www.cdc.gov/japaneseencephalitis/symptoms/index.html.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1091 ===
26.3 • Acellular Diseases of the Nervous System 1077
LINK TO LEARNING
This interactive map (https://www.openstax.org/l/22arboviralUS) identifies cases of several arboviral diseases in
humans and reservoir species by state and year for the United States.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Why is it unlikely that arboviral encephalitis viruses will be eradicated in the future?
• Which is the most common form of viral encephalitis in the United States?
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 2
Levofloxacin is a quinolone antibiotic that is often prescribed to treat bacterial infections of the respiratory tract,
including pneumonia and bronchitis. But after taking the medication for a week, David returned to his physician
sicker than before. He claimed that the antibiotic had no effect on his earlier symptoms. In addition, he now was
experiencing headaches, a stiff neck, and difficulty focusing at work. He also showed the doctor a rash that had
developed on his arms over the past week. His doctor, more concerned now, began to ask about David's
activities over the past two weeks.
David explained that he had been recently working on a project to disassemble an old barn. His doctor collected
sputum samples and scrapings from David’s rash for cultures. A spinal tap was also performed to examine
David’s CSF. Microscopic examination of his CSF revealed encapsulated yeast cells. Based on this result, the
doctor prescribed a new antimicrobial therapy using amphotericin B and flucytosine.
• Why was the original treatment ineffective?
• Why is the presence of a capsule clinically important?
Jump to the previous Clinical Focus box. Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.
Zika Virus Infection
Zika virus infection is an emerging arboviral disease associated with human illness in Africa, Southeast Asia, and
South and Central America; however, its range is expanding as a result of the widespread range of its mosquito
vector. The first cases originating in the United States were reported in 2016.The Zika virus was initially described in
1947 from monkeys in the Zika Forest of Uganda through a network that monitored yellow fever. It was not
25
considered a serious human pathogen until the first large-scale outbreaks occurred in Micronesia in 2007;
however, the virus has gained notoriety over the past decade, as it has emerged as a cause of symptoms similar to
other arboviral infections that include fever, skin rashes, conjunctivitis, muscle and joint pain, malaise, and
headache. Mosquitoes of the Aedes genus are the primary vectors, although the virus can also be transmitted
sexually, to a fetus during pregnancy, or through a blood transfusion.
Most Zika virus infections result in mild symptoms such as fever, a slight rash, or conjunctivitis. However, infections
in pregnant people can adversely affect the developing fetus. Reports in 2015 indicate fetal infections can result in
brain damage, including a serious birth defect called microcephaly, in which the infant is born with an abnormally
26
small head (Figure 26.14).
Diagnosis of Zika is primarily based on clinical symptoms. However, the FDA recently authorized the use of a Zika
virus RNA assay, Trioplex RT-PCR, and Zika MAC-ELISA to test patient blood and urine to confirm Zika virus disease.
There are currently no antiviral treatments or vaccines for Zika virus, and treatment is limited to supportive care.
25 Sikka, Veronica, Vijay Kumar Chattu, Raaj K. Popli, Sagar C. Galwankar, Dhanashree Kelkar, Stanley G. Sawicki, Stanislaw P. Stawicki,
and Thomas J. Papadimos, “The Emergence of Zika Virus as a Global Health Security Threat: A Review and a Consensus Statement of the
INDUSEM Joint Working Group (JWG),” Journal of Global Infectious Diseases 8, no. 1 (2016): 3.
26 Mlakar, Jernej, Misa Korva, Nataša Tul, Mara Popović, Mateja Poljšak-Prijatelj, Jerica Mraz, Marko Kolenc et al., “Zika Virus Associated
with Microcephaly,” New England Journal of Medicine 374, no. 10 (2016): 951-8.
=== PDF PAGE 1092 ===
1078 26 • Nervous System Infections
FIGURE 26.14 (a) This colorized electron micrograph shows Zika virus particles (red). (b) People infected by the Zika virus during
pregnancy may give birth to children with microcephaly, a deformity characterized by an abnormally small head and brain. (credit a, b:
modifications of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What are the signs and symptoms of Zika virus infection in adults?
• Why is Zika virus infection considered a serious public health threat?
Rabies
Rabies is a deadly zoonotic disease that has been known since antiquity. The disease is caused by rabies virus (RV),
a member of the family Rhabdoviridae, and is primarily transmitted through the bite of an infected mammal.
Rhabdoviridae are enveloped RNA viruses that have a distinctive bullet shape (Figure 26.15); they were first studied
by Louis Pasteur, who obtained rabies virus from rabid dogs and cultivated the virus in rabbits. He successfully
prepared a rabies vaccine using dried nerve tissues from infected animals. This vaccine was used to first treat an
infected human in 1885.
The most common reservoirs in the United States are wild animals such as raccoons (30.2% of all animal cases
during 2014), bats (29.1%), skunks (26.3%), and foxes (4.1%); collectively, these animals were responsible for a
total of 92.6% of animal rabies cases in the United States in 2014. The remaining 7.4% of cases that year were in
27
domesticated animals such as dogs, cats, horses, mules, sheep, goats, and llamas. While there are typically only
one or two human cases per year in the United States, rabies still causes tens of thousands of human deaths per
year worldwide, primarily in Asia and Africa.
The low incidence of rabies in the United States is primarily a result of the widespread vaccination of dogs and cats.
An oral vaccine is also used to protect wild animals, such as raccoons and foxes, from infection. Oral vaccine
28
programs tend to focus on geographic areas where rabies is endemic. The oral vaccine is usually delivered in a
29
package of bait that is dropped by airplane, although baiting in urban areas is done by hand to maximize safety.
Many countries require a quarantine or proof of rabies vaccination for domestic pets being brought into the country.
These procedures are especially strict in island nations where rabies infections are rare, such as Australia.
The incubation period for rabies can be lengthy, ranging from several weeks or months to over a year. As the virus
replicates, it moves from the site of the bite into motor and sensory axons of peripheral nerves and spreads from
nerve to nerve using a process called retrograde transport, eventually making its way to the CNS through the spinal
ganglia. Once rabies virus reaches the brain, the infection leads to encephalitis caused by the disruption of normal
neurotransmitter function, resulting in the symptoms associated with rabies. The virions act in the synaptic spaces
27 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Rabies, Wild Animals,” 2016. Accessed September 13, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/
rabies/location/usa/surveillance/wild_animals.html.
28 Slate, Dennis, Charles E. Rupprecht, Jane A. Rooney, Dennis Donovan, Donald H. Lein, and Richard B. Chipman, “Status of Oral Rabies
Vaccination in Wild Carnivores in the United States,” Virus Research 111, no. 1 (2005): 68-76.
29 Finnegan, Christopher J., Sharon M. Brookes, Nicholas Johnson, Jemma Smith, Karen L. Mansfield, Victoria L. Keene, Lorraine M.
McElhinney, and Anthony R. Fooks, “Rabies in North America and Europe,” Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 95, no. 1 (2002): 9-13.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1279140/.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1093 ===
26.3 • Acellular Diseases of the Nervous System 1079
as competitors with a variety of neurotransmitters for acetylcholine, GABA, and glycine receptors. Thus, the action
of rabies virus is neurotoxic rather than cytotoxic. After the rabies virus infects the brain, it can continue to spread
through other neuronal pathways, traveling out of the CNS to tissues such as the salivary glands, where the virus can
be released. As a result, as the disease progresses the virus can be found in many other tissues, including the
salivary glands, taste buds, nasal cavity, and tears.
The early symptoms of rabies include discomfort at the site of the bite, fever, and headache. Once the virus reaches
the brain and later symptoms appear, the disease is always fatal. Terminal rabies cases can end in one of two ways:
either furious or paralytic rabies. Individuals with furious rabies become very agitated and hyperactive. Hydrophobia
(a fear of water) is common in patients with furious rabies, which is caused by muscular spasms in the throat when
swallowing or thinking about water. Excess salivation and a desire to bite can lead to foaming of the mouth. These
behaviors serve to enhance the likelihood of viral transmission, although contact with infected secretions like saliva
or tears alone is sufficient for infection. The disease culminates after just a few days with terror and confusion,
followed by cardiovascular and respiratory arrest. In contrast, individuals with paralytic rabies generally follow a
longer course of disease. The muscles at the site of infection become paralyzed. Over a period of time, the paralysis
slowly spreads throughout the body. This paralytic form of disease culminates in coma and death.
Before present-day diagnostic methods were available, rabies diagnosis was made using a clinical case history and
histopathological examination of biopsy or autopsy tissues, looking for the presence of Negri bodies. We now know
these histologic changes cannot be used to confirm a rabies diagnosis. There are no tests that can detect rabies
virus in humans at the time of the bite or shortly thereafter. Once the virus has begun to replicate (but before clinical
symptoms occur), the virus can be detected using an immunofluorescence test on cutaneous nerves found at the
base of hair follicles. Saliva can also be tested for viral genetic material by reverse transcription followed by
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Even when these tests are performed, most suspected infections are treated
as positive in the absence of contravening evidence. It is better that patients undergo unnecessary therapy because
of a false-positive result, rather than die as the result of a false-negative result.
Human rabies infections are treated by immunization with multiple doses of an attenuated vaccine to develop active
immunity in the patient (see the Clinical Focus feature in the chapter on Acellular Pathogens). Vaccination of an
already-infected individual has the potential to work because of the slow progress of the disease, which allows time
for the patient’s immune system to develop antibodies against the virus. Patients may also be treated with human
rabies immune globulin (antibodies to the rabies virus) to encourage passive immunity. These antibodies will
neutralize any free viral particles. Although the rabies infection progresses slowly in peripheral tissues, patients are
not normally able to mount a protective immune response on their own.
FIGURE 26.15 Virions of the rabies virus have a characteristic bullet-like shape. (credit: modification of work by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)
=== PDF PAGE 1094 ===
1080 26 • Nervous System Infections
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How does the bite from an infected animal transmit rabies?
• What is the goal of wildlife vaccination programs for rabies?
• How is rabies treated in a human?
Poliomyelitis
Poliomyelitis (polio), caused by poliovirus, is a primarily intestinal disease that, in a small percentage of cases,
proceeds to the nervous system, causing paralysis and, potentially, death. Poliovirus is highly contagious, with
transmission occurring by the fecal-oral route or by aerosol or droplet transmission. Approximately 72% of all
poliovirus infections are asymptomatic; another 25% result only in mild intestinal disease, producing nausea, fever,
30
and headache. However, even in the absence of symptoms, patients infected with the virus can shed it in feces
and oral secretions, potentially transmitting the virus to others. In about one case in every 200, the poliovirus
31
affects cells in the CNS.
After it enters through the mouth, initial replication of poliovirus occurs at the site of implantation in the pharynx and
gastrointestinal tract. As the infection progresses, poliovirus is usually present in the throat and in the stool before
the onset of symptoms. One week after the onset of symptoms, there is less poliovirus in the throat, but for several
weeks, poliovirus continues to be excreted in the stool. Poliovirus invades local lymphoid tissue, enters the
bloodstream, and then may infect cells of the CNS. Replication of poliovirus in motor neurons of the anterior horn
cells in the spinal cord, brain stem, or motor cortex results in cell destruction and leads to flaccid paralysis. In
severe cases, this can involve the respiratory system, leading to death. Patients with impaired respiratory function
are treated using positive-pressure ventilation systems. In the past, patients were sometimes confined to Emerson
respirators, also known as iron lungs (Figure 26.16).
Direct detection of the poliovirus from the throat or feces can be achieved using reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR)
or genomic sequencing to identify the genotype of the poliovirus infecting the patient. Serological tests can be used
to determine whether the patient has been previously vaccinated. There are no therapeutic measures for polio;
treatment is limited to various supportive measures. These include pain relievers, rest, heat therapy to ease muscle
spasms, physical therapy and corrective braces if necessary to help with walking, and mechanical ventilation to
assist with breathing if necessary.
FIGURE 26.16 (a) An Emerson respiratory (or iron lung) that was used to help some polio victims to breathe. (b) Polio can also result in
impaired motor function. (credit b: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Two different vaccines were introduced in the 1950s that have led to the dramatic decrease in polio worldwide
(Figure 26.17). The Salk vaccine is an inactivated polio virus that was first introduced in 1955. This vaccine is
30 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Global Health – Polio,” 2014. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/polio/
about/index.htm.
31 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Global Health – Polio,” 2014. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/polio/
about/index.htm.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1095 ===
26.3 • Acellular Diseases of the Nervous System 1081
delivered by intramuscular injection. The Sabin vaccine is an oral polio vaccine that contains an attenuated virus; it
was licensed for use in 1962. There are three serotypes of poliovirus that cause disease in humans; both the Salk
and the Sabin vaccines are effective against all three.
Attenuated viruses from the Sabin vaccine are shed in the feces of immunized individuals and thus have the
potential to infect nonimmunized individuals. By the late 1990s, the few polio cases originating in the United States
could be traced back to the Sabin vaccine. In these cases, mutations of the attenuated virus following vaccination
likely allowed the microbe to revert to a virulent form. For this reason, the United States switched exclusively to the
Salk vaccine in 2000. Because the Salk vaccine contains an inactivated virus, there is no risk of transmission to
others (see Vaccines). Currently four doses of the vaccine are recommended for children: at 2, 4, and 6–18 months
of age, and at 4–6 years of age.
In 1988, WHO launched the Global Polio Eradication Initiative with the goal of eradicating polio worldwide through
immunization. That goal is now close to being realized. Polio is now endemic in only a few countries, including
Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Nigeria, where vaccination efforts have been disrupted by military conflict or political
instability.
FIGURE 26.17 (a) Polio is caused by the poliovirus. (b) Two American virologists developed the first polio vaccines: Albert Sabin (left) and
Jonas Salk (right). (credit a: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
MICRO CONNECTIONS
The Terror of Polio
In the years after World War II, the United States and the Soviet Union entered a period known as the Cold War.
Although there was no armed conflict, the two super powers were diplomatically and economically isolated from
each other, as represented by the so-called Iron Curtain between the Soviet Union and the rest of the world. After
1950, migration or travel outside of the Soviet Union was exceedingly difficult, and it was equally difficult for
foreigners to enter the Soviet Union. The United States also placed strict limits on Soviets entering the country.
During the Eisenhower administration, only 20 graduate students from the Soviet Union were allowed to come to
study in the United States per year.
Yet even the Iron Curtain was no match for polio. The Salk vaccine became widely available in the West in 1955, and
by the time the Sabin vaccine was ready for clinical trials, most of the susceptible population in the United States
and Canada had already been vaccinated against polio. Sabin needed to look elsewhere for study participants. At
the height of the Cold War, Mikhail Chumakov was allowed to come to the United States to study Sabin’s work.
Likewise, Sabin, an American microbiologist, was allowed to travel to the Soviet Union to begin clinical trials.
Chumakov organized Soviet-based production and managed the experimental trials to test the new vaccine in the
Soviet Union. By 1959, over ten million Soviet children had been safely treated with Sabin’s vaccine.
=== PDF PAGE 1096 ===
1082 26 • Nervous System Infections
As a result of a global vaccination campaign with the Sabin vaccine, the overall incidence of polio has dropped
dramatically. Today, polio has been nearly eliminated around the world and is only rarely seen in the United States.
Perhaps one day soon, polio will become the third microbial disease to be eradicated from the general population
[small pox and rinderpest (the cause of cattle plague) being the first two].
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How is poliovirus transmitted?
• Compare the pros and cons of each of the two polio vaccines.
Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies
Acellular infectious agents called prions are responsible for a group of related diseases known as transmissible
spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) that occurs in humans and other animals (see Viroids, Virusoids, and Prions).
All TSEs are degenerative, fatal neurological diseases that occur when brain tissue becomes infected by prions.
These diseases have a slow onset; symptoms may not become apparent until after an incubation period of years
and perhaps decades, but death usually occurs within months to a few years after the first symptoms appear.
TSEs in animals include scrapie, a disease in sheep that has been known since the 1700s, and chronic wasting
disease, a disease of deer and elk in the United States and Canada. Mad cow disease is seen in cattle and can be
transmitted to humans through the consumption of infected nerve tissues. Human prion diseases include
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and kuru, a rare disease endemic to Papua New Guinea.
Prions are infectious proteinaceous particles that are not viruses and do not contain nucleic acid. They are typically
transmitted by exposure to and ingestion of infected nervous system tissues, tissue transplants, blood transfusions,
or contaminated fomites. Prion proteins are normally found in a healthy brain tissue in a form called PrPC. However,
if this protein is misfolded into a denatured form (PrPSc), it can cause disease. Although the exact function of PrPC is
not currently understood, the protein folds into mostly alpha helices and binds copper. The rogue protein, on the
other hand, folds predominantly into beta-pleated sheets and is resistant to proteolysis. In addition, PrPSc can
induce PrPC to become misfolded and produce more rogue protein (Figure 26.18).
As PrPSc accumulates, it aggregates and forms fibrils within nerve cells. These protein complexes ultimately cause
the cells to die. As a consequence, brain tissues of infected individuals form masses of neurofibrillary tangles and
amyloid plaques that give the brain a spongy appearance, which is why these diseases are called spongiform
encephalopathy (Figure 6.26). Damage to brain tissue results in a variety of neurological symptoms. Most
commonly, affected individuals suffer from memory loss, personality changes, blurred vision, uncoordinated
movements, and insomnia. These symptoms gradually worsen over time and culminate in coma and death.
The gold standard for diagnosing TSE is the histological examination of brain biopsies for the presence of
characteristic amyloid plaques, vacuoles, and prion proteins. Great care must be taken by clinicians when handling
suspected prion-infected materials to avoid becoming infected themselves. Other tissue assays search for the
presence of the 14-3-3 protein, a marker for prion diseases like Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. New assays, like RT-
QuIC (real-time quaking-induced conversion), offer new hope to effectively detect the abnormal prion proteins in
tissues earlier in the course of infection. Prion diseases cannot be cured. However, some medications may help slow
their progress. Medical support is focused on keeping patients as comfortable as possible despite progressive and
debilitating symptoms.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1097 ===
26.3 • Acellular Diseases of the Nervous System 1083
FIGURE 26.18 The replicative cycle of misfolded prion proteins.
LINK TO LEARNING
Because prion-contaminated materials are potential sources of infection for clinical scientists and physicians, both
the World Health Organization (https://www.openstax.org/l/22WHOprion) and CDC (https://www.openstax.org/l/
22CDCprion) provide information to inform, educate and minimize the risk of infections due to prions.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Do prions reproduce in the conventional sense?
• What is the connection between prions and the removal of animal byproducts from the food of farm animals?
DISEASE PROFILE
Acellular Infections of the Nervous System
Serious consequences are the common thread among these neurological diseases. Several cause debilitating
paralysis, and some, such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and rabies, are always or nearly always fatal. Since few
drugs are available to combat these infections, vector control and vaccination are critical for prevention and
containment. Figure 26.19 summarizes some important viral and prion infections of the nervous system.
=== PDF PAGE 1098 ===
1084 26 • Nervous System Infections
FIGURE 26.19
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1099 ===
26.4 • Fungal and Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous System 1085
26.4 Fungal and Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the most common fungi that can cause infections of the nervous system
• Compare the major characteristics of specific fungal diseases affecting the nervous system
Fungal infections of the nervous system, called neuromycoses, are rare in healthy individuals. However,
neuromycoses can be devastating in immunocompromised or elderly patients. Several eukaryotic parasites are also
capable of infecting the nervous system of human hosts. Although relatively uncommon, these infections can also
be life-threatening in immunocompromised individuals. In this section, we will first discuss neuromycoses, followed
by parasitic infections of the nervous system.
Cryptococcocal Meningitis
Cryptococcus neoformans is a fungal pathogen that can cause meningitis. This yeast is commonly found in soils and
is particularly associated with pigeon droppings. It has a thick capsule that serves as an important virulence factor,
inhibiting clearance by phagocytosis. Most C. neoformans cases result in subclinical respiratory infections that, in
healthy individuals, generally resolve spontaneously with no long-term consequences (see Respiratory Mycoses). In
immunocompromised patients or those with other underlying illnesses, the infection can progress to cause
meningitis and granuloma formation in brain tissues. Cryptococcus antigens can also serve to inhibit cell-mediated
immunity and delayed-type hypersensitivity.
Cryptococcus can be easily cultured in the laboratory and identified based on its extensive capsule (Figure 26.20).
C. neoformans is frequently cultured from urine samples of patients with disseminated infections.
Prolonged treatment with antifungal drugs is required to treat cryptococcal infections. Combined therapy is required
with amphotericin B plus flucytosine for at least 10 weeks. Many antifungal drugs have difficulty crossing the blood-
brain barrier and have strong side effects that necessitate low doses; these factors contribute to the lengthy time of
treatment. Patients with AIDS are particularly susceptible to Cryptococcus infections because of their compromised
immune state. AIDS patients with cryptococcosis can also be treated with antifungal drugs, but they often have
relapses; lifelong doses of fluconazole may be necessary to prevent reinfection.
FIGURE 26.20 An India ink-negative stain of C. neoformans showing the thick capsules around the spherical yeast cells. (credit:
modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Why are neuromycoses infections rare in the general population?
• How is a cryptococcal infection acquired?
=== PDF PAGE 1100 ===
1086 26 • Nervous System Infections
DISEASE PROFILE
Neuromycoses
Neuromycoses typically occur only in immunocompromised individuals and usually only invade the nervous
system after first infecting a different body system. As such, many diseases that sometimes affect the nervous
system have already been discussed in previous chapters. Figure 26.21 presents some of the most common
fungal infections associated with neurological disease. This table includes only the neurological aspects
associated with these diseases; it does not include characteristics associated with other body systems.
FIGURE 26.21
CLINICAL FOCUS
Resolution
David’s new prescription for two antifungal drugs, amphotericin B and flucytosine, proved effective, and his
condition began to improve. Culture results from David’s sputum, skin, and CSF samples confirmed a fungal
infection. All were positive for C. neoformans. Serological tests of his tissues were also positive for the C.
neoformans capsular polysaccharide antigen.
Since C. neoformans is known to occur in bird droppings, it is likely that David had been exposed to the fungus
while working on the barn. Despite this exposure, David’s doctor explained to him that immunocompetent
people rarely contract cryptococcal meningitis and that his immune system had likely been compromised by the
anti-inflammatory medication he was taking to treat his Crohn’s disease. However, to rule out other possible
causes of immunodeficiency, David’s doctor recommended that he be tested for HIV.
After David tested negative for HIV, his doctor took him off the corticosteroid he was using to manage his
Crohn’s disease, replacing it with a different class of drug. After several weeks of antifungal treatments, David
managed a full recovery.
Jump to the previous Clinical Focus box.
Amoebic Meningitis
Primary amoebic meningoencephalitis (PAM) is caused by Naegleria fowleri. This amoeboflagellate is commonly
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1101 ===
26.4 • Fungal and Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous System 1087
found free-living in soils and water. It can exist in one of three forms—the infective amoebic trophozoite form, a
motile flagellate form, and a resting cyst form. PAM is a rare disease that has been associated with young and
otherwise healthy individuals. Individuals are typically infected by the amoeba while swimming in warm bodies of
freshwater such as rivers, lakes, and hot springs. The pathogenic trophozoite infects the brain by initially entering
through nasal passages to the sinuses; it then moves down olfactory nerve fibers to penetrate the submucosal
nervous plexus, invades the cribriform plate, and reaches the subarachnoid space. The subarachnoid space is highly
vascularized and is a route of dissemination of trophozoites to other areas of the CNS, including the brain (Figure
26.22). Inflammation and destruction of gray matter leads to severe headaches and fever. Within days, confusion
and convulsions occur and quickly progress to seizures, coma, and death. The progression can be very rapid, and
the disease is often not diagnosed until autopsy.
N. fowleri infections can be confirmed by direct observation of CSF; the amoebae can often be seen moving while
viewing a fresh CSF wet mount through a microscope. Flagellated forms can occasionally also be found in CSF. The
amoebae can be stained with several stains for identification, including Giemsa-Wright or a modified trichrome
stain. Detection of antigens with indirect immunofluorescence, or genetic analysis with PCR, can be used to confirm
an initial diagnosis. N. fowleri infections are nearly always fatal; only 3 of 138 patients with PAM in the United States
32
have survived. A new experimental drug called miltefosine shows some promise for treating these infections. This
drug is a phosphotidylcholine derivative that is thought to inhibit membrane function in N. fowleri, triggering
33
apoptosis and disturbance of lipid-dependent cell signaling pathways. When administered early in infection and
coupled with therapeutic hypothermia (lowering the body’s core temperature to reduce the cerebral edema
associated with infection), this drug has been successfully used to treat primary amoebic encephalitis.
FIGURE 26.22 Free-living amoeba in human brain tissue from a patient suffering from PAM. (credit: modification of work by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention)
Granulomatous Amoebic Encephalitis
Acanthamoeba and Balamuthia species are free-living amoebae found in many bodies of fresh water. Human
infections by these amoebae are rare. However, they can cause amoebic keratitis in contact lens wearers (see
Protozoan and Helminthic Infections of the Eyes), disseminated infections in immunocompromised patients, and
granulomatous amoebic encephalitis (GAE) in severe cases. Compared to PAM, GAE tend to be subacute
infections. The microbe is thought to enter through either the nasal sinuses or breaks in the skin. It is disseminated
hematogenously and can invade the CNS. There, the infections lead to inflammation, formation of lesions, and
development of typical neurological symptoms of encephalitis (Figure 26.23). GAE is nearly always fatal.
GAE is often not diagnosed until late in the infection. Lesions caused by the infection can be detected using CT or
MRI. The live amoebae can be directly detected in CSF or tissue biopsies. Serological tests are available but
generally are not necessary to make a correct diagnosis, since the presence of the organism in CSF is definitive.
Some antifungal drugs, like fluconazole, have been used to treat acanthamoebal infections. In addition, a
combination of miltefosine and voriconazole (an inhibitor of ergosterol biosynthesis) has recently been used to
successfully treat GAE. Even with treatment, however, the mortality rate for patients with these infections is high.
32 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Naegleria fowleri—Primary Amoebic Meningoencephalitis (PAM)—Amebic
Encephalitis,” 2016. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/naegleria/treatment.html.
33 Dorlo, Thomas PC, Manica Balasegaram, Jos H. Beijnen, and Peter J. de Vries, “Miltefosine: A Review of Its Pharmacology and
Therapeutic Efficacy in the Treatment of Leishmaniasis,” Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy 67, no. 11 (2012): 2576-97.
=== PDF PAGE 1102 ===
1088 26 • Nervous System Infections
FIGURE 26.23 (a) Brain tissue from a patient who died of granulomatous amebic encephalitis (GAE) caused by Balamuthia mandrillaris. (b)
A close-up of the necrosis in the center of the brain section. (credit a, b: modifications of work by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How is granulomatous amoebic encephalitis diagnosed?
Human African Trypanosomiasis
Human African trypanosomiasis (also known as African sleeping sickness) is a serious disease endemic to two
distinct regions in sub-Saharan Africa. It is caused by the insect-borne hemoflagellate Trypanosoma brucei. The
subspecies Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense causes East African trypanosomiasis (EAT), and another subspecies,
Trypanosoma brucei gambiense causes West African trypanosomiasis (WAT). A few hundred cases of EAT are
34
currently reported each year. WAT is more commonly reported and tends to be a more chronic disease. Around
35
7000 to 10,000 new cases of WAT are identified each year.
T. brucei is primarily transmitted to humans by the bite of the tsetse fly (Glossina spp.). Soon after the bite of a
tsetse fly, a chancre forms at the site of infection. The flagellates then spread, moving into the circulatory system
(Figure 26.24). These systemic infections result in an undulating fever, during which symptoms persist for two or
three days with remissions of about a week between bouts. As the disease enters its final phase, the pathogens
move from the lymphatics into the CNS. Neurological symptoms include daytime sleepiness, insomnia, and mental
deterioration. In EAT, the disease runs its course over a span of weeks to months. In contrast, WAT often occurs over
a span of months to years.
Although a strong immune response is mounted against the trypanosome, it is not sufficient to eliminate the
pathogen. Through antigenic variation, Trypanosoma can change their surface proteins into over 100 serological
types. This variation leads to the undulating form of the initial disease. The initial septicemia caused by the infection
leads to high fevers. As the immune system responds to the infection, the number of organisms decrease, and the
clinical symptoms abate. However, a subpopulation of the pathogen then alters its surface coat antigens by
antigenic variation and evades the immune response. These flagellates rapidly proliferate and cause another bout of
disease. If untreated, these infections are usually fatal.
Clinical symptoms can be used to recognize the early signs of African trypanosomiasis. These include the formation
of a chancre at the site of infection and Winterbottom’s sign. Winterbottom’s sign refers to the enlargement of
lymph nodes on the back of the neck—often indicative of cerebral infections. Trypanosoma can be directly observed
in stained samples including blood, lymph, CSF, and skin biopsies of chancres from patients. Antibodies against the
parasite are found in most patients with acute or chronic disease. Serologic testing is generally not used for
diagnosis, however, since the microscopic detection of the parasite is sufficient. Early diagnosis is important for
34 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Parasites – African Trypanosomiasis (also known as Sleeping Sickness), East African
Trypanosomiasis FAQs,” 2012. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/sleepingsickness/gen_info/faqs-east.html.
35 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Parasites – African Trypanosomiasis (also known as Sleeping Sickness), Epidemiology
& Risk Factors,” 2012. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/sleepingsickness/epi.html.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1103 ===
26.4 • Fungal and Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous System 1089
treatment. Before the nervous system is involved, drugs like pentamidine (an inhibitor of nuclear metabolism) and
suramin (mechanism unclear) can be used. These drugs have fewer side effects than the drugs needed to treat the
second stage of the disease. Once the sleeping sickness phase has begun, harsher drugs including melarsoprol (an
arsenic derivative) and eflornithine can be effective. Following successful treatment, patients still need to have
follow-up examinations of their CSF for two years to detect possible relapses of the disease. The most effective
means of preventing these diseases is to control the insect vector populations.
FIGURE 26.24 Trypanosoma brucei, the causative agent of African sleeping sickness, in a human blood smear. (credit: modification of work
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What is the symptom of a systemic Trypanosoma infection?
• What are the symptoms of a neurological Trypanosoma infection?
• Why are trypanosome infections so difficult to eradicate?
Neurotoxoplasmosis
Toxoplasma gondii is an ubiquitous intracellular parasite that can cause neonatal infections. Cats are the definitive
host, and humans can become infected after eating infected meat or, more commonly, by ingesting oocysts shed in
the feces of cats (see Parasitic Infections of the Circulatory and Lymphatic Systems). T. gondii enters the circulatory
36
system by passing between the endothelial cells of blood vessels. Most cases of toxoplasmosis are
asymptomatic. However, in immunocompromised patients, neurotoxoplasmosis caused by T. gondii infections are
37
one of the most common causes of brain abscesses. The organism is able to cross the blood-brain barrier by
infecting the endothelial cells of capillaries in the brain. The parasite reproduces within these cells, a step that
appears to be necessary for entry to the brain, and then causes the endothelial cell to lyse, releasing the progeny
into brain tissues. This mechanism is quite different than the method it uses to enter the bloodstream in the first
38
place.
The brain lesions associated with neurotoxoplasmosis can be detected radiographically using MRI or CAT scans
(Figure 26.25). Diagnosis can be confirmed by direct observation of the organism in CSF. RT-PCR assays can also be
used to detect T. gondii through genetic markers.
Treatment of neurotoxoplasmosis caused by T. gondii infections requires six weeks of multi-drug therapy with
pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and folinic acid. Long-term maintenance doses are often required to prevent
recurrence.
36 Carruthers, Vern B., and Yasuhiro Suzuki, “Effects of Toxoplasma gondii Infection on the Brain,” Schizophrenia Bulletin 33, no. 3
(2007): 745-51.
37 Uppal, Gulshan, “CNS Toxoplasmosis in HIV,” 2015. Accessed June 30, 2016. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/
1167298-overview#a3.
38 Konradt, Christoph, Norikiyo Ueno, David A. Christian, Jonathan H. Delong, Gretchen Harms Pritchard, Jasmin Herz, David J. Bzik et al.,
“Endothelial Cells Are a Replicative Niche for Entry of Toxoplasma gondii to the Central Nervous System,” Nature Microbiology 1 (2016):
16001.
=== PDF PAGE 1104 ===
1090 26 • Nervous System Infections
FIGURE 26.25 This Toxoplasma gondii cyst, observed in mouse brain tissue, contains thousands of inactive parasites. (credit: modification
of work by USDA)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Under what conditions is Toxoplasma infection serious?
• How does Toxoplasma circumvent the blood-brain barrier?
Neurocysticercosis
Cysticercosis is a parasitic infection caused by the larval form of the pork tapeworm, Taenia solium. When the larvae
invade the brain and spinal cord, the condition is referred to as neurocysticercosis. This condition affects millions of
39
people worldwide and is the leading cause of adult onset epilepsy in the developing world.
The life cycle of T. solium is discussed in Helminthic Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract. Following ingestion, the
eggs hatch in the intestine to form larvae called cysticerci. Adult tapeworms form in the small intestine and produce
eggs that are shed in the feces. These eggs can infect other individuals through fecal contamination of food or other
surfaces. Eggs can also hatch within the intestine of the original patient and lead to an ongoing autoinfection. The
cystercerci, can migrate to the blood and invade many tissues in the body, including the CNS.
Neurocysticercosis is usually diagnosed through noninvasive techniques. Epidemiological information can be used
as an initial screen; cysticercosis is endemic in Central and South America, Africa, and Asia. Radiological imaging
(MRI and CT scans) is the primary method used to diagnose neurocysticercosis; imaging can be used to detect the
one- to two-centimeter cysts that form around the parasites (Figure 26.26). Elevated levels of eosinophils in the
blood can also indicate a parasitic infection. EIA and ELISA are also used to detect antigens associated with the
pathogen.
FIGURE 26.26 Brain CT scans of sagittal (left) and axial (right) sections of a brain with neurocysticercosis. Numerous cysts are visible in
both images, as indicated by the arrows. (credit: modification of work by Segamwenge IL, Kioko NP)
The treatment for neurocysticercosis depends on the location, number, size, and stage of cysticerci present.
39 DeGiorgio, Christopher M., Marco T. Medina, Reyna Durón, Chi Zee, and Susan Pietsch Escueta, “Neurocysticercosis,” Epilepsy Currents
4, no. 3 (2004): 107-11.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1105 ===
26.4 • Fungal and Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous System 1091
Antihelminthic chemotherapy includes albendazole and praziquantel. Because these drugs kill viable cysts, they
may acutely increase symptoms by provoking an inflammatory response caused by the release of Taenia cysticerci
antigens, as the cysts are destroyed by the drugs. To alleviate this response, corticosteroids that cross the blood-
brain barrier (e.g., dexamethasone) can be used to mitigate these effects. Surgical intervention may be required to
remove intraventricular cysts.
DISEASE PROFILE
Parasitic Diseases of the Nervous System
Parasites that successfully invade the nervous system can cause a wide range of neurological signs and
symptoms. Often, they inflict lesions that can be visualized through radiologic imaging. A number of these
infections are fatal, but some can be treated (with varying levels of success) by antimicrobial drugs (Figure
26.27).
FIGURE 26.27
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What neurological condition is associated with neurocysticercosis?
• How is neurocysticercosis diagnosed?
=== PDF PAGE 1106 ===
1092 26 • Summary
Summary
26.1 Anatomy of the Nervous System infection can be spread through the placenta to a
fetus. Diagnosis is through culture of blood or
• The nervous system consists of two subsystems:
CSF. Treatment is with antibiotics and there is no
the central nervous system and peripheral
vaccine.
nervous system.
• Hansen’s disease (leprosy) is caused by the
• The skull and three meninges (the dura mater,
intracellular parasite Mycobacterium leprae.
arachnoid mater, and pia mater) protect the
Infections cause demylenation of neurons,
brain.
resulting in decreased sensation in peripheral
• Tissues of the PNS and CNS are formed of cells
appendages and body sites. Treatment is with
called glial cells and neurons.
multi-drug antibiotic therapy, and there is no
• Since the blood-brain barrier excludes most
universally recognized vaccine.
microbes, there is no normal microbiota in the
CNS. 26.3 Acellular Diseases of the Nervous
• Some pathogens have specific virulence factors System
that allow them to breach the blood-brain barrier.
• Viral meningitis is more common and generally
Inflammation of the brain or meninges caused
less severe than bacterial menigitis. It can result
by infection is called encephalitis or meningitis,
from secondary sequelae of many viruses or be
respectively. These conditions can lead to
caused by infections of arboviruses.
blindness, deafness, coma, and death.
• Various types of arboviral encephalitis are
26.2 Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous concentrated in particular geographic locations
System throughout the world. These mosquito-borne
viral infections of the nervous system are
• Bacterial meningitis can be caused by several
typically mild, but they can be life-threatening in
species of encapsulated bacteria, including
some cases.
Haemophilus influenzae, Neisseria meningitidis,
• Zika virus is an emerging arboviral infection with
Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Streptococcus
generally mild symptoms in most individuals, but
agalactiae (group B streptococci). H. influenzae
infections of pregnant people can cause the birth
affects primarily young children and neonates, N.
defect microcephaly.
meningitidis is the only communicable pathogen
• Polio is typically a mild intestinal infection but
and mostly affects children and young adults, S.
can be damaging or fatal if it progresses to a
pneumoniae affects mostly young children, and
neurological disease.
S. agalactiae affects newborns during or shortly
• Rabies is nearly always fatal when untreated and
after birth.
remains a significant problem worldwide.
• Symptoms of bacterial meningitis include fever,
• Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
neck stiffness, headache, confusion, convulsions,
such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and kuru are
coma, and death.
caused by prions. These diseases are untreatable
• Diagnosis of bacterial meningitis is made through
and ultimately fatal. Similar prion diseases are
observations and culture of organisms in CSF.
found in animals.
Bacterial meningitis is treated with antibiotics. H.
influenzae and N. meningitidis have vaccines 26.4 Fungal and Parasitic Diseases of the
available. Nervous System
• Clostridium species cause neurological diseases,
• Neuromycoses are uncommon in
including botulism and tetanus, by producing
immunocompetent people, but
potent neurotoxins that interfere with
immunocompromised individuals with fungal
neurotransmitter release. The PNS is typically
infections have high mortality rates. Treatment of
affected. Treatment of Clostridium infection is
neuromycoses require prolonged therapy with
effective only through early diagnosis with
antifungal drugs at low doses to avoid side
administration of antibiotics to control the
effects and overcome the effect of the blood-
infection and antitoxins to neutralize the
brain barrier.
endotoxin before they enter cells.
• Some protist infections of the nervous systems
• Listeria monocytogenes is a foodborne pathogen
are fatal if not treated, including primary
that can infect the CNS, causing meningitis. The
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1107 ===
26 • Review Questions 1093
amoebic meningitis, granulomatous amoebic • African trypanosomiasis is a serious but
encephalitis, human African trypanosomiasis, treatable disease endemic to two distinct regions
and neurotoxoplasmosis. in sub-Saharan Africa caused by the insect-borne
• The various forms of ameobic encephalitis hemoflagellate Trypanosoma brucei.
caused by the different amoebic infections are • Neurocysticercosis is treated using
typically fatal even with treatment, but they are antihelminthic drugs or surgery to remove the
rare. large cysts from the CNS.
Review Questions
Multiple Choice
1 . What is the outermost membrane surrounding cause of neonatal meningitis?
the brain called? a. Haemophilus influenzae b
a. pia mater b. Streptococcus agalactiae
b. arachnoid mater c. Neisseria meningitidis
c. dura mater d. Streptococcus pneumoniae
d. alma mater
8 . What sign/symptom would NOT be associated
2 . What term refers to an inflammation of brain with infant botulism?
tissues? a. difficulty suckling
a. encephalitis b. limp body
b. meningitis c. stiff neck
c. sinusitis d. weak cry
d. meningoencephalitis
9 . Which of the following can NOT be prevented
3 . Nerve cells form long projections called with a vaccine?
________. a. tetanus
a. soma b. pneumococcal meningitis
b. axons c. meningococcal meningitis
c. dendrites d. listeriosis
d. synapses
10 . How is leprosy primarily transmitted from
4 . Chemicals called ________ are stored in person to person?
neurons and released when the cell is a. contaminated toilet seats
stimulated by a signal. b. shaking hands
a. toxins c. blowing nose
b. cytokines d. sexual intercourse
c. chemokines
d. neurotransmitters 11 . Which of these diseases can be prevented with a
vaccine for humans?
5 . The central nervous system is made up of a. eastern equine encephalitis
a. sensory organs and muscles. b. western equine encephalitis
b. the brain and muscles. c. West Nile encephalitis
c. the sensory organs and spinal cord. d. Japanese encephalitis
d. the brain and spinal column.
12 . Which of these diseases does NOT require the
6 . Which of the following organisms causes introduction of foreign nucleic acid?
epidemic meningitis cases at college campuses? a. kuru
a. Haemophilus influenzae type b b. polio
b. Neisseria meningitidis c. rabies
c. Streptococcus pneumoniae d. St. Louis encephalitis
d. Listeria monocytogenes
13 . Which of these is true of the Sabin but NOT the
7 . Which of the following is the most common Salk polio vaccine?
=== PDF PAGE 1108 ===
1094 26 • Review Questions
a. requires four injections c. Trypanosoma brucei rhodanese
b. currently administered in the United d. Trypanosoma brucei gambiense
States
c. mimics the normal route of infection 18 . Which of the following is the causative agent of
d. is an inactivated vaccine primary amoebic meningoencephalitis?
a. Naegleria fowleri
14 . Which of the following animals is NOT a typical b. Entameba histolyticum
reservoir for the spread of rabies? c. Amoeba proteus
a. dog d. Acanthamoeba polyphaga
b. bat
c. skunk 19 . What is the biological vector for African sleeping
d. chicken sickness?
a. mosquito
15 . Which of these diseases results in meningitis b. tsetse fly
caused by an encapsulated yeast? c. deer tick
a. cryptococcosis d. sand fly
b. histoplasmosis
c. candidiasis 20 . How do humans usually contract
d. coccidiomycosis neurocysticercosis?
a. the bite of an infected arthropod
16 . What kind of stain is most commonly used to b. exposure to contaminated cat feces
visualize the capsule of cryptococcus? c. swimming in contaminated water
a. Gram stain d. ingestion of undercooked pork
b. simple stain
c. negative stain 21 . Which of these is the most important cause of
d. fluorescent stain adult onset epilepsy?
a. neurocysticercosis
17 . Which of the following is the causative agent of b. neurotoxoplasmosis
East African trypanosomiasis? c. primary amoebic meningoencephalitis
a. Trypanosoma cruzi d. African trypanosomiasis
b. Trypanosoma vivax
Matching
22 . Match each strategy for microbial invasion of the
CNS with its description.
___leukocyte-facilitated C. pathogen
entry passes through
___intercellular entry A. pathogen the cells of the
gains entry by blood-brain
infecting barrier
peripheral white
blood cells ___nonhematogenous entry D. pathogen
passes between
___transcellular entry B. pathogen the cells of the
bypasses the blood-brain
blood-brain barrier
barrier by travel
along the
olfactory or
trigeminal
cranial nerves
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1109 ===
26 • Review Questions 1095
Fill in the Blank
23 . The cell body of a neuron is called the 35 . ________ are the most common reservoir for
________. the rabies virus worldwide.
24 . A signal is transmitted down the ________ of a 36 . ________ was the scientist who developed the
nerve cell. inactivated polio vaccine.
25 . The ________ is filled with cerebrospinal fluid. 37 . ________ is a prion disease of deer and elk.
26 . The ________ ________ prevents access of 38 . The rogue form of prion protein exists primarily
microbes in the blood from gaining access to the in the ________ conformation.
central nervous system.
39 . The ________ is the main virulence factor of
27 . The ________ are a set of membranes that Cryptococcus neoformans.
cover and protect the brain.
40 . The drug of choice for fungal infections of the
28 . The form of meningitis that can cause epidemics nervous system is ________.
is caused by the pathogen ________.
41 . The larval forms of a tapeworm are known as
29 . The symptoms of tetanus are caused by the ________.
neurotoxin ________.
42 . ________ sign appears as swollen lymph nodes
30 . ________ is another name for leprosy. at the back of the neck in early African
trypanosomiasis.
31 . Botulism prevents the release of the
neurotransmitter ________. 43 . ________ African trypanosomiasis causes a
chronic form of sleeping sickness.
32 . ________ is a neurological disease that can be
prevented with the DTaP vaccine. 44 . The definitive host for Toxoplasma gondii is
________.
33 . Tetanus patients exhibit ________ when muscle
spasms causes them to arch their backs. 45 . Trypanosomes can evade the immune response
through ________ variation.
34 . The rogue form of the prion protein is called
________.
Short Answer
46 . Briefly describe the defenses of the brain against here are indicative of tuberculoid leprosy. If the
trauma and infection. diagnosis is correct, what microorganism would be
found in a skin biopsy?
47 . Describe how the blood-brain barrier is formed.
48 . Identify the type of cell shown, as well as the
following structures: axon, dendrite, myelin sheath,
soma, and synapse.
FIGURE 26.28 (credit: Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)
50 . Explain how a person could contract variant
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease by consuming
products from a cow with bovine spongiform
encephalopathy (mad cow disease).
49 . A physician suspects the lesion and pustule pictured
=== PDF PAGE 1110 ===
1096 26 • Review Questions
51 . Why do nervous system infections by fungi Naegleria fowleri.
require such long treatment times?
53 . Briefly describe how humans can develop
52 . Briefly describe how humans are infected by neurocysticercosis.
Critical Thinking
54 . What important function does the blood-brain would you describe this pattern, and why does it
barrier serve? How might this barrier be occur?
problematic at times?
55 . Explain how tetanospasmin functions to cause
disease.
56 . The most common causes of bacterial
meningitis can be the result of infection by three
very different bacteria. Which bacteria are they
and how are these microbes similar to each
other?
FIGURE 26.29 (credit: modification of work by Wellcome
57 . Explain how infant botulism is different than
Images)
foodborne botulism.
58 . If the Sabin vaccine is being used to eliminate 60 . Fungal meningoencephalitis is often the ultimate
polio worldwide, explain why a country with a cause of death for AIDS patients. What factors
near zero infection rate would opt to use the make these infections more problematic than
Salk vaccine but not the Sabin vaccine? those of bacterial origin?
59 . The graph shown tracks the body temperature of a 61 . Compare East African trypanosomiasis with
patient infected with Trypanosoma brucei. How West African trypanosomiasis.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1111 ===
A • Fundamentals of Physics and Chemistry Important to Microbiology 1097
APPENDIX A
Fundamentals of Physics and Chemistry Important to
Microbiology
Like all other matter, the matter that comprises microorganisms is governed by the laws of chemistry and physics.
The chemical and physical properties of microbial pathogens—both cellular and acellular—dictate their habitat,
control their metabolic processes, and determine how they interact with the human body. This appendix provides a
review of some of the fundamental principles of chemistry and physics that are essential to an understanding of
microbiology. Many of the chapters in this text—especially Microbial Biochemistry and Microbial
Metabolism—assume that the reader already has an understanding of the concepts reviewed here.
Atomic Structure
Life is made up of matter. Matter occupies space and has mass. All matter is composed of atoms. All atoms contain
protons, electrons, and neutrons (Figure A1). The only exception is hydrogen (H), which is made of one proton and
one electron. A proton is a positively charged particle that resides in the nucleus (the core of the atom) of an atom
and has a mass of 1 atomic mass unit (amu) and a charge of +1. An electron is a negatively charged particle that
travels in the space around the nucleus. Electrons are distributed in different energy levels called electron shells.
Electrons have a negligible mass and a charge of –1. Neutrons, like protons, reside in the nucleus of an atom. They
have a mass of 1 amu and no charge (neutral). The positive (proton) and negative (electron) charges balance each
other in a neutral atom, which has a net zero charge. Because protons and neutrons each have a mass of 1 amu, the
mass of an atom is equal to the number of protons and neutrons of that atom. The number of electrons does not
factor into the overall mass because electron mass is so small.
FIGURE A1 Atoms are made up of protons and neutrons located within the nucleus and electrons surrounding the nucleus.
Chemical Elements
All matter is composed of atoms of elements. Elements have unique physical and chemical properties and are
substances that cannot easily be transformed either physically or chemically into other substances. Each element
has been given a name, usually derived from Latin or English. The elements also have one- or two-letter symbols
representing the name; for example, sodium (Na), gold (Au), and silver (Ag) have abbreviations derived from their
original Latin names natrium, aurum, and argentum, respectively. Examples with English abbreviations are carbon
(C), hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), and nitrogen (N). A total of 118 different elements (92 of which occur naturally) have
been identified and organized into the periodic table of elements. Of the naturally occurring elements, fewer than 30
are found in organisms on Earth, and four of those (C, H, O, and N) make up approximately 96% of the mass of an
1
organism.
1 Schrijver, Karel, and Iris Schrijver. Living with the Stars: How the Human Body Is Connected to the Life Cycles of the Earth, the Planets,
=== PDF PAGE 1112 ===
1098 A • Fundamentals of Physics and Chemistry Important to Microbiology
Each unique element is identified by the number of protons in its atomic nucleus. In addition to protons, each
element's atomic nucleus contains an equal or greater number of neutrons (with the exception of hydrogen, which
has only one proton). The total number of protons per element is described as the atomic number, and the
combined mass of protons and neutrons is called the atomic mass or mass number. Therefore, it is possible to
determine the number of neutrons by subtracting the atomic number from the mass number.
Isotopes are different forms of the same element that have the same number of protons, but a different number of
neutrons. Many elements have several isotopes with one or two commonly occurring isotopes in nature. For
example, carbon-12 (12C), the most common isotope of carbon (98.6% of all C found on Earth), 2 contains six
protons and six neutrons. Therefore, it has a mass number of 12 (6 protons + 6 neutrons) and an atomic number of
6.
There are two additional types of isotopes in nature: heavy isotopes, and radioisotopes. Heavy isotopes have one or
more extra neutrons while still maintaining a stable atomic nucleus. An example of a heavy isotope is carbon-13
(13C) (1.1% of all carbon). 3 13C has a mass number of 13 (6 protons + 7 neutrons). Since the atomic number of 13C
is 6, it is still the element carbon; however, it has more mass than the more common form of the element, 12C,
because of the extra neutron in the nucleus. Carbon-14 (14C) (0.0001% of all carbon) 4 is an example of a
radioisotope. 14C has a mass number of 14 (6 protons + 8 neutrons); however, the extra neutrons in 14C result in an
unstable nucleus. This instability leads to the process of radioactive decay. Radioactive decay involves the loss of
one or more neutrons and the release of energy in the form of gamma rays, alpha particles, or beta particles
(depending on the isotope).
Heavy isotopes and radioisotopes of carbon and other elements have proven to be useful in research, industry, and
medicine.
Chemical Bonds
There are three types of chemical bonds that are important when describing the interaction of atoms both within
and between molecules in microbiology: (1) covalent bonds, which can be either polar or non-polar, (2) ionic bonds,
and (3) hydrogen bonds. There are other types of interactions such as London dispersion forces and van der Waals
forces that could also be discussed when describing the physical and chemical properties of the intermolecular
interactions of atoms, but we will not include descriptions of these forces here.
Chemical bonding is determined by the outermost shell of electrons, called the valence electrons (VE), of an atom.
The number of VE is important when determining the number and type of chemical bonds an atom will form.
Covalent Bonds
The strongest chemical bond between two or more atoms is a covalent bond. These bonds form when an electron is
shared between two atoms, and these are the most common form of chemical bond in living organisms. Covalent
bonds form between the atoms of elements that make up the biological molecules in our cells. An example of a
simple molecule formed with covalent bonds is water, H2O, with one VE per H atom and 6 VE per O atom. Because
of the VE configuration, each H atom is able to accept one additional VE and each O atom is able to accept two
additional VE. When sharing electrons, the hydrogen and oxygen atoms that combine to form water molecules
become bonded together by covalent bonds (Figure A2). The electron from the hydrogen atom divides its time
between the outer electron shell of the hydrogen atom and the outermost electron shell of the oxygen atom. To
completely fill the outer shell of an oxygen atom, two electrons from two hydrogen atoms are needed, hence the
subscript “2” indicating two atoms of H in a molecule of H2O. This sharing is a lower energy state for all of the atoms
involved than if they existed without their outer shells filled.
There are two types of covalent bonds: polar and nonpolar. Nonpolar covalent bonds form between two atoms of
the same or different elements that share the electrons equally (Figure A2). In a polar covalent bond, the electrons
shared by the atoms spend more time closer to one nucleus than to the other nucleus. Because of the unequal
and the Stars. Oxford University Press, USA, 2015.
2 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “Stable and Radiocarbon Isotopes of Carbon Dioxide.” Web page. Accessed Feb 19,
2016 [http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/outreach/isotopes/chemistry.html]
3 ibid.
4 ibid.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1113 ===
A • Fundamentals of Physics and Chemistry Important to Microbiology 1099
distribution of electrons between the different nuclei, a slightly positive (δ+) or slightly negative (δ–) charge
develops. Water is an example of a molecule formed with polar covalent bonds (Figure A2).
FIGURE A2 The water molecule (top left) depicts a polar bond with a slightly positive charge on the hydrogen atoms and a slightly negative
charge on the oxygen. Methane (top right) is an example of a nonpolar covalent bond. Sodium chloride (bottom) is a substance formed from
ionic bonds between sodium and chlorine.
Ions and Ionic Bonds
When an atom does not contain equal numbers of protons and electrons, it is called an ion. Because the number of
=== PDF PAGE 1114 ===
1100 A • Fundamentals of Physics and Chemistry Important to Microbiology
electrons does not equal the number of protons, each ion has a net charge. Positive ions are formed by losing
electrons and are called cations. Negative ions are formed by gaining electrons and are called anions.
For example, a sodium atom has only has one electron in its outermost shell. It takes less energy for the sodium
atom to donate that one electron than it does to accept seven more electrons, which it would need to fill its outer
shell. If the sodium atom loses an electron, it now has 11 protons and only 10 electrons, leaving it with an overall
charge of +1. It is now called a sodium ion (Na+).
A chlorine atom has seven electrons in its outer shell. Again, it is more energy efficient for the chlorine atom to gain
one electron than to lose seven. Therefore, it will more likely gain an electron to form an ion with 17 protons and 18
electrons, giving it a net negative (–1) charge. It is now called a chloride ion (Cl–). This movement of electrons from
one atom to another is referred to as electron transfer. Because positive and negative charges attract, these ions
stay together and form an ionic bond, or a bond between ions. When Na+ and Cl– ions combine to produce NaCl, an
electron from a sodium atom stays with the other seven from the chlorine atom, and the sodium and chloride ions
attract each other in a lattice of ions with a net zero charge (Figure A2).
Polyatomic ions consist of multiple atoms joined by covalent bonds; but unlike a molecule, a polyatomic ion has a
positive or negative charge. It behaves as a cation or anion and can therefore form ionic bonds with other ions to
form ionic compounds. The atoms in a polyatomic ion may be from the same element or different elements.
Table A1 lists some cations and anions that commonly occur in microbiology. Note that this table includes
monoatomic as well as polyatomic ions.
Some Common Ions in Microbiology
Cations Anions
sodium Na+ chloride Cl–
hydrogen H+ bicarbonate
potassium K+ carbonate
ammonium hydrogen sulfate
copper (I) Cu+ hydrogen sulfide HS–
copper (II) Cu2+ hydroxide OH–
iron (II) Fe2+ hypochlorite ClO–
iron (III) Fe3+ nitrite
nitrate
peroxide
phosphate
pyrophosphate
TABLE A1
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1115 ===
A • Fundamentals of Physics and Chemistry Important to Microbiology 1101
Some Common Ions in Microbiology
Cations Anions
sulfite
thiosulfate
TABLE A1
Molecular Formula, Molecular Mass, and the Mole
For molecules formed by covalent bonds, the molecular formula represents the number and types of elemental
atoms that compose the molecule. As an example, consider a molecule of glucose, which has the molecular formula
C6H12O6. This molecular formula indicates that a single molecule of glucose is formed from six carbon atoms,
twelve hydrogen atoms, and six oxygen atoms.
The molecular mass of a molecule can be calculated using the molecular formula and the atomic mass of each
element in the molecule. The number of each type of atom is multiplied by the atomic mass; then the products are
added to get the molecular mass. For example the molecular mass of glucose, C6H12O6 (Figure A3), is calculated as:
FIGURE A3 The molecular structure of glucose showing the numbers of carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen atoms. Glucose has a molecular
mass of 180 amu.
The number of entities composing a mole has been experimentally determined to be 6.022 × 1023, a fundamental
constant named Avogadro’s number (NA) or the Avogadro constant. This constant is properly reported with an
explicit unit of “per mole.”
Energy
Thermodynamics refers to the study of energy and energy transfer involving physical matter.
Matter participating in a particular case of energy transfer is called a system, and everything outside of that matter is
called the surroundings. There are two types of systems: open and closed. In an open system, energy can be
exchanged with its surroundings. A closed system cannot exchange energy with its surroundings. Biological
organisms are open systems. Energy is exchanged between them and their surroundings as they use energy from
the sun to perform photosynthesis or consume energy-storing molecules and release energy to the environment by
doing work and releasing heat. Like all things in the physical world, energy is subject to physical laws. In general,
energy is defined as the ability to do work, or to create some kind of change. Energy exists in different forms. For
example, electrical energy, light energy, and heat energy are all different types of energy. The first law of
thermodynamics, often referred to as the law of conservation of energy, states that the total amount of energy in
the universe is constant and conserved. Energy exists in many different forms. According to the first law of
thermodynamics, energy may be transferred from place to place or transformed into different forms, but it cannot
be created or destroyed.
=== PDF PAGE 1116 ===
1102 A • Fundamentals of Physics and Chemistry Important to Microbiology
The challenge for all living organisms is to obtain energy from their surroundings in forms that they can transfer or
transform into usable energy to do work. Microorganisms have evolved to meet this challenge. Chemical energy
stored within organic molecules such as sugars and fats is transferred and transformed through a series of cellular
chemical reactions into energy within molecules of ATP. Energy in ATP molecules is easily accessible to do work.
Examples of the types of work that cells need to do include building complex molecules, transporting materials,
powering the motion of cilia or flagella, and contracting muscle fibers to create movement.
A microorganism’s primary tasks of obtaining, transforming, and using energy to do work may seem simple.
However, the second law of thermodynamics explains why these tasks are more difficult than they appear. All
energy transfers and transformations are never completely efficient. In every energy transfer, some amount of
energy is lost in a form that is unusable. In most cases, this form is heat energy. Thermodynamically, heat energy is
defined as the energy transferred from one system to another that is not work. For example, some energy is lost as
heat energy during cellular metabolic reactions.
The more energy that is lost by a system to its surroundings, the less ordered and more random the system is.
Scientists refer to the measure of randomness or disorder within a system as entropy. High entropy means high
disorder and low energy. Molecules and chemical reactions have varying entropy as well. For example, entropy
increases as molecules at a high concentration in one place diffuse and spread out. The second law of
thermodynamics says that energy will always be lost as heat in energy transfers or transformations. Microorganisms
are highly ordered, requiring constant energy input to be maintained in a state of low entropy.
Chemical Reactions
Chemical reactions occur when two or more atoms bond together to form molecules or when bonded atoms are
broken apart. The substances used in a chemical reaction are called the reactants (usually found on the left side of
a chemical equation), and the substances produced by the reaction are known as the products (usually found on the
right side of a chemical equation). An arrow is typically drawn between the reactants and products to indicate the
direction of the chemical reaction; this direction is not always a “one-way street.”
An example of a simple chemical reaction is the breaking down of hydrogen peroxide molecules, each of which
consists of two hydrogen atoms bonded to two oxygen atoms (H2O2). The reactant hydrogen peroxide is broken
down into water, containing one oxygen atom bound to two hydrogen atoms (H2O), and oxygen, which consists of
two bonded oxygen atoms (O2). In the equation below, the reaction includes two hydrogen peroxide molecules and
two water molecules. This is an example of a balanced chemical equation, wherein the number of atoms of each
element is the same on each side of the equation. According to the law of conservation of matter, the number of
atoms before and after a chemical reaction should be equal, such that no atoms are, under normal circumstances,
created or destroyed.
Some chemical reactions, such as the one shown above, can proceed in one direction until the reactants are all used
up. Equations that describe these reactions contain a unidirectional arrow and are irreversible. Reversible reactions
are those that can go in either direction. In reversible reactions, reactants are turned into products, but when the
concentration of product rises above a certain threshold (characteristic of the particular reaction), some of these
products will be converted back into reactants; at this point, the designations of products and reactants are
reversed. The changes in concentration continue until a certain relative balance in concentration between reactants
and products occurs—a state called chemical equilibrium. At this point, both the forward and reverse reactions
continue to occur, but they do so at the same rate, so the concentrations of reactants and products do not change.
These situations of reversible reactions are often denoted by a chemical equation with a double-headed arrow
pointing towards both the reactants and products. For example, when carbon dioxide dissolves in water, it can do so
as a gas dissolved in water or by reacting with water to produce carbonic acid. In the cells of some microorganisms,
the rate of carbonic acid production is accelerated by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase, as indicated in the following
equation:
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1117 ===
A • Fundamentals of Physics and Chemistry Important to Microbiology 1103
Properties of Water and Solutions
The hydrogen and oxygen atoms within water molecules form polar covalent bonds. There is no overall charge to a
water molecule, but there is one ∂+ on each hydrogen atom and two ∂– on the oxygen atom. Each water molecule
attracts other water molecules because of the positive and negative charges in the different parts of the molecule
(Figure A4). Water also attracts other polar molecules (such as sugars), forming hydrogen bonds. When a substance
readily forms hydrogen bonds with water, it can dissolve in water and is referred to as hydrophilic (“water-loving”).
Hydrogen bonds are not readily formed with nonpolar substances like oils and fats. These nonpolar compounds are
hydrophobic (“water-fearing”) and will orient away from and avoid water.
FIGURE A4 Hydrogen bonds form between slightly positive (∂+) and slightly negative (∂–) charges of polar covalent molecules such as
water.
The hydrogen bonds in water allow it to absorb and release heat energy more slowly than many other substances.
This means that water moderates temperature changes within organisms and in their environments. As energy input
continues, the balance between hydrogen-bond formation and breaking swings toward fewer hydrogen bonds: more
bonds are broken than are formed. This process results in the release of individual water molecules at the surface of
the liquid (such as a body of water, the leaves of a plant, or the skin of an organism) in a process called evaporation.
Conversely, as molecular motion decreases and temperatures drop, less energy is present to break the hydrogen
bonds between water molecules. These bonds remain intact and begin to form a rigid, lattice-like structure (e.g.,
ice). When frozen, ice is less dense (the molecules are farther apart) than liquid water. This means that ice floats on
the surface of a body of water. In lakes, ponds, and oceans, ice will form on the surface of the water, creating an
insulating barrier to protect the animal and plant life beneath from freezing in the water. If this did not happen,
plants and animals living in water would freeze in a block of ice and could not move freely, making life in cold
temperatures difficult or impossible.
Because water is polar, with slight positive and negative charges, ionic compounds and polar molecules can readily
dissolve in it. Water is, therefore, what is referred to as a solvent—a substance capable of dissolving another
substance. The charged particles will form hydrogen bonds with a surrounding layer of water molecules. This is
referred to as a sphere of hydration and serves to keep the ions separated or dispersed in the water (Figure A5).
These spheres of hydration are also referred to as hydration shells. The polarity of the water molecule makes it an
effective solvent and is important in its many roles in living systems.
=== PDF PAGE 1118 ===
1104 A • Fundamentals of Physics and Chemistry Important to Microbiology
FIGURE A5 When table salt (NaCl) is mixed in water, spheres of hydration form around the ions.
The ability of insects to float on and skate across pond water results from the property of cohesion. In cohesion,
water molecules are attracted to each other (because of hydrogen bonding), keeping the molecules together at the
liquid-air (gas) interface. Cohesion gives rise to surface tension, the capacity of a substance to withstand rupture
when placed under tension or stress.
These cohesive forces are also related to water’s property of adhesion, or the attraction between water molecules
and other molecules. This is observed when water “climbs” up a straw placed in a glass of water. You will notice that
the water appears to be higher on the sides of the straw than in the middle. This is because the water molecules are
attracted to the straw and therefore adhere to it.
Cohesion and adhesion are also factors in bacterial colonies and biofilm formation. Cohesion keeps the colony intact
(helps it “stick” to a surface), while adhesion keeps the cells adhered to each other. Cohesive and adhesive forces
are important for sustaining life. For example, because of these forces, water in natural surroundings provides the
conditions necessary to allow bacterial and archaeal cells to adhere and accumulate on surfaces.
Acids and Bases
The pH of a solution is a measure of hydrogen ion (H+) and hydroxide ion (OH–) concentrations and is described as
acidity or alkalinity, respectively. Acidity and alkalinity (also referred to as basicity) can be measured and
calculated. pH can be simply represented by the mathematic equation, On the left side of the
equation, the "p" means "the negative logarithm of " and the H represents the [H+]. On the right side of the equation,
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1119 ===
A • Fundamentals of Physics and Chemistry Important to Microbiology 1105
[H+] is the concentration of H+ in moles/L . What is not represented in this simple equation is the contribution of the
OH–, which also participates in acidity or alkalinity. Calculation of pH results in a number range of 0 to 14 called the
pH scale (Figure A6). A pH value between 0 and 6.9 indicates an acid. It is also referred to as a low pH, due to a high
[H+] and low [OH–] concentration. A pH value between 7.1 and 14 indicates an alkali or base. It is also referred to as
a high pH, due to a low [H+] and high [OH–] concentration. A pH of 7 is described as a neutral pH and occurs when
[H+] equals [OH–].
FIGURE A6 The pH scale measures the concentration of hydrogen ions [H+] and [OH–] in a substance. (credit: modification of work by
Edward Stevens)
A change of one unit on the pH scale represents a change in the [H+] by a factor of 10, a change in two units
represents a change in the [H+] by a factor of 100. Thus, small changes in pH represent large changes in [H+].
=== PDF PAGE 1120 ===
1106 A • Fundamentals of Physics and Chemistry Important to Microbiology
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1121 ===
B • Mathematical Basics 1107
APPENDIX B
Mathematical Basics
Squares and Other Powers
An exponent, or a power, is mathematical shorthand for repeated multiplications. For example, the exponent “2”
means to multiply the base for that exponent by itself (in the example here, the base is “5”):
The exponent is “2” and the base is the number “5.” This expression (multiplying a number by itself) is also called a
square. Any number raised to the power of 2 is being squared. Any number raised to the power of 3 is being cubed:
A number raised to the fourth power is equal to that number multiplied by itself four times, and so on for higher
powers. In general:
Calculating Percents
A percent is a way of expressing a fractional amount of something using a whole divided into 100 parts. A percent is
a ratio whose denominator is 100. We use the percent symbol, %, to show percent. Thus, 25% means a ratio of ,
3% means a ratio of , and 100 % percent means , or a whole.
Converting Percents
A percent can be converted to a fraction by writing the value of the percent as a fraction with a denominator of 100
and simplifying the fraction if possible.
A percent can be converted to a decimal by writing the value of the percent as a fraction with a denominator of 100
and dividing the numerator by the denominator.
To convert a decimal to a percent, write the decimal as a fraction. If the denominator of the fraction is not 100,
convert it to a fraction with a denominator of 100, and then write the fraction as a percent.
To convert a fraction to a percent, first convert the fraction to a decimal, and then convert the decimal to a percent.
Suppose a researcher finds that 15 out of 23 students in a class are carriers of Neisseria meningitides. What
percentage of students are carriers? To find this value, first express the numbers as a fraction.
Then divide the numerator by the denominator.
=== PDF PAGE 1122 ===
1108 B • Mathematical Basics
Finally, to convert a decimal to a percent, multiply by 100.
The percent of students who are carriers is 65%.
You might also get data on occurrence and non-occurrence; for example, in a sample of students, 9 tested positive
for Toxoplasma antibodies, while 28 tested negative. What is the percentage of seropositive students? The first step
is to determine the “whole,” of which the positive students are a part. To do this, sum the positive and negative
tests.
The whole sample consisted of 37 students. The fraction of positives is:
To find the percent of students who are carriers, divide the numerator by the denominator and multiply by 100.
The percent of positive students is about 24%.
Another way to think about calculating a percent is to set up equivalent fractions, one of which is a fraction with 100
as the denominator, and cross-multiply. The previous example would be expressed as:
Now, cross multiply and solve for the unknown:
The answer, rounded, is the same.
Multiplying and Dividing by Tens
In many fields, especially in the sciences, it is common to multiply decimals by powers of 10. Let’s see what
happens when we multiply 1.9436 by some powers of 10.
The number of places that the decimal point moves is the same as the number of zeros in the power of ten. Table B1
summarizes the results.
Multiply by Zeros Decimal point moves . . .
10 1 1 place to the right
100 2 2 places to the right
TABLE B1
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1123 ===
B • Mathematical Basics 1109
Multiply by Zeros Decimal point moves . . .
1,000 3 3 places to the right
10,000 4 4 places to the right
TABLE B1
We can use this pattern as a shortcut to multiply by powers of ten instead of multiplying using the vertical format.
We can count the zeros in the power of 10 and then move the decimal point that same number of places to the right.
So, for example, to multiply 45.86 by 100, move the decimal point 2 places to the right.
Sometimes when we need to move the decimal point, there are not enough decimal places. In that case, we use
zeros as placeholders. For example, let’s multiply 2.4 by 100. We need to move the decimal point 2 places to the
right. Since there is only one digit to the right of the decimal point, we must write a 0 in the hundredths place.
When dividing by powers of 10, simply take the opposite approach and move the decimal to the left by the number
of zeros in the power of ten.
Let’s see what happens when we divide 1.9436 by some powers of 10.
If there are insufficient digits to move the decimal, add zeroes to create places.
Scientific Notation
Scientific notation is used to express very large and very small numbers as a product of two numbers. The first
number of the product, the digit term, is usually a number not less than 1 and not greater than 10. The second
number of the product, the exponential term, is written as 10 with an exponent. Some examples of scientific
notation are given in Table B2.
Standard Notation Scientific Notation
1000 1 × 103
100 1 × 102
10 1 × 101
1 1 × 100
0.1 1 × 10−1
0.01 1 × 10−2
TABLE B2
Scientific notation is particularly useful notation for very large and very small numbers, such as 1,230,000,000 =
1.23 × 109, and 0.00000000036 = 3.6 × 10−10.
=== PDF PAGE 1124 ===
1110 B • Mathematical Basics
Expressing Numbers in Scientific Notation
Converting any number to scientific notation is straightforward. Count the number of places needed to move the
decimal next to the left-most non-zero digit: that is, to make the number between 1 and 10. Then multiply that
number by 10 raised to the number of places you moved the decimal. The exponent is positive if you moved the
decimal to the left and negative if you moved the decimal to the right. So
and
The power (exponent) of 10 is equal to the number of places the decimal is shifted.
Logarithms
The common logarithm (log) of a number is the power to which 10 must be raised to equal that number. For
example, the common logarithm of 100 is 2, because 10 must be raised to the second power to equal 100.
Additional examples are in Table B3.
Number Exponential Form Common Logarithm
1000 103 3
10 101 1
1 100 0
0.1 10−1 −1
0.001 10−3 −3
TABLE B3
To find the common logarithm of most numbers, you will need to use the LOG button on a calculator.
Rounding and Significant Digits
In reporting numerical data obtained via measurements, we use only as many significant figures as the accuracy of
the measurement warrants. For example, suppose a microbiologist using an automated cell counter determines that
there are 525,341 bacterial cells in a one-liter sample of river water. However, she records the concentration as
525,000 cells per liter and uses this rounded number to estimate the number of cells that would likely be found in
10 liters of river water. In this instance, the last three digits of the measured quantity are not considered significant.
They are rounded to account for variations in the number of cells that would likely occur if more samples were
measured.
The importance of significant figures lies in their application to fundamental computation. In addition and
subtraction, the sum or difference should contain as many digits to the right of the decimal as that in the least
certain (indicated by underscoring in the following example) of the numbers used in the computation.
Suppose a microbiologist wishes to calculate the total mass of two samples of agar.
The least certain of the two masses has three decimal places, so the sum must have three decimal places.
In multiplication and division, the product or quotient should contain no more digits than than in the factor
containing the least number of significant figures. Suppose the microbiologist would like to calculate how much of a
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1125 ===
B • Mathematical Basics 1111
reagent would be present in 6.6 mL if the concentration is 0.638 g/mL.
Again, the answer has only one decimal place because this is the accuracy of the least accurate number in the
calculation.
When rounding numbers, increase the retained digit by 1 if it is followed by a number larger than 5 (“round up”). Do
not change the retained digit if the digits that follow are less than 5 (“round down”). If the retained digit is followed
by 5, round up if the retained digit is odd, or round down if it is even (after rounding, the retained digit will thus
always be even).
Generation Time
It is possible to write an equation to calculate the cell numbers at any time if the number of starting cells and
doubling time are known, as long as the cells are dividing at a constant rate. We define N0 as the starting number of
bacteria, the number at time t = 0. Ni is the number of bacteria at time t = i, an arbitrary time in the future. Finally we
will set j equal to the number of generations, or the number of times the cell population doubles during the time
interval. Then we have,
This equation is an expression of growth by binary fission.
In our example, N0 = 4, the number of generations, j, is equal to 3 after 90 minutes because the generation time is
30 minutes. The number of cells can be estimated from the following equation:
The number of cells after 90 minutes is 32.
Most Probable Number
The table in Figure B1 contains values used to calculate the most probable number example given in How Microbes
Grow.
=== PDF PAGE 1126 ===
1112 B • Mathematical Basics
FIGURE B1
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1127 ===
C • Metabolic Pathways 1113
APPENDIX C
Metabolic Pathways
Glycolysis
FIGURE C1 The first half of glycolysis uses two ATP molecules in the phosphorylation of glucose, which is then split into two three-carbon
molecules.
=== PDF PAGE 1128 ===
1114 C • Metabolic Pathways
FIGURE C2 The second half of glycolysis involves phosphorylation without ATP investment (step 6) and produces two NADH and four ATP
molecules per glucose.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1129 ===
C • Metabolic Pathways 1115
Entner–Doudoroff Pathway
FIGURE C3 The Entner–Doudoroff Pathway is a metabolic pathway that converts glucose to ethanol and nets one ATP.
The Pentose-Phosphate Pathway
FIGURE C4 The pentose phosphate pathway, also called the phosphogluconate pathway and the hexose monophosphate shunt, is a
=== PDF PAGE 1130 ===
1116 C • Metabolic Pathways
metabolic pathway parallel to glycolysis that generates NADPH and five-carbon sugars as well as ribose 5-phosphate, a precursor for the
synthesis of nucleotides from glucose.
TCA Cycle
FIGURE C5 In this transition reaction, a multi-enzyme complex converts pyruvate into one acetyl (2C) group plus one carbon dioxide (CO2).
The acetyl group is attached to a Coenzyme A carrier that transports the acetyl group to the site of the Krebs cycle. In the process, one
molecule of NADH is formed.
FIGURE C6 In the citric acid cycle, the acetyl group from acetyl CoA is attached to a four-carbon oxaloacetate molecule to form a six-
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1131 ===
C • Metabolic Pathways 1117
carbon citrate molecule. Through a series of steps, citrate is oxidized, releasing two carbon dioxide molecules for each acetyl group fed into
the cycle. In the process, three NADH, one FADH2, and one ATP or GTP (depending on the cell type) is produced by substrate-level
phosphorylation. Because the final product of the citric acid cycle is also the first reactant, the cycle runs continuously in the presence of
sufficient reactants. (credit: modification of work by “Yikrazuul”/Wikimedia Commons)
Beta Oxidation
FIGURE C7 During fatty acid oxidation, triglycerides can be broken down into 2C acetyl groups that can enter the Krebs cycle and be used
as a source of energy when glucose levels are low.
=== PDF PAGE 1132 ===
1118 C • Metabolic Pathways
Electron Transport Chain and Oxidative Phosphorylation
FIGURE C8 The electron transport chain is a series of electron carriers and ion pumps that are used to pump H+ ions across a membrane.
H+ then flow back through the membrane by way of ATP synthase, which catalyzes the formation of ATP. The location of the electron
transport chain is the inner mitochondrial matrix in eukaryotic cells and cytoplasmic membrane in prokaryotic cells.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1133 ===
C • Metabolic Pathways 1119
Calvin-Benson Cycle
FIGURE C9 The Calvin-Benson cycle has three stages. In stage 1, the enzyme RuBisCO incorporates carbon dioxide into an organic
molecule, 3-PGA. In stage 2, the organic molecule is reduced using electrons supplied by NADPH. In stage 3, RuBP, the molecule that
starts the cycle, is regenerated so that the cycle can continue. Only one carbon dioxide molecule is incorporated at a time, so the cycle
must be completed three times to produce a single three-carbon GA3P molecule, and six times to produce a six-carbon glucose molecule.
=== PDF PAGE 1134 ===
1120 C • Metabolic Pathways
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1135 ===
D • Taxonomy of Clinically Relevant Microorganisms 1121
APPENDIX D
Taxonomy of Clinically Relevant Microorganisms
Bacterial Pathogens
The following tables list the species, and some higher groups, of pathogenic Eubacteria mentioned in the text. The
classification of Bacteria, one of the three domains of life, is in constant flux as relationships become clearer
through sampling of genetic sequences. Many groups at all taxonomic levels still have an undetermined relationship
with other members of the phylogenetic tree of Bacteria. Bergey’s Manual of Systematics of Archaea and Bacteria
maintains a published list and descriptions of prokaryotic species. The tables here follow the taxonomic
1
organization in the Bergey’s Manual Taxonomic Outline.
We have divided the species into tables corresponding to different bacterial phyla. The taxonomic rank of kingdom is
not used in prokaryote taxonomy, so the phyla are the subgrouping below domain. Note that many bacterial phyla
not represented by these tables. The species and genera are listed only under the class within each phylum. The
names given to bacteria are regulated by the International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria as maintained by the
International Committee on Systematics or Prokaryotes.
Phylum Actinobacteria
Class Genus Specific Epithet Related Diseases
Actinobacteria Corynebacterium diphtheriae Diphtheria
Gardnerella vaginalis Bacterial vaginosis
Micrococcus Opportunistic infections
Mycobacterium bovis Tuberculosis, primarily in cattle
Mycobacterium leprae Hansen’s disease
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Tuberculosis
Cutibacterium acnes Acne, blepharitis, endophthalmitis
TABLE D1
Phylum Bacteroidetes
Class Genus Specific Epithet Related Diseases
Bacteroidia Porphyromonas Periodontal disease
Prevotella intermedia Periodontal disease
TABLE D2
1 Bergey’s Manual Trust. Bergey’s Manual of Systematics of Archaea and Bacteria, Taxonomic Outline. 2012. http://www.bergeys.org/
outlines.html
=== PDF PAGE 1136 ===
1122 D • Taxonomy of Clinically Relevant Microorganisms
Phylum Chlamydiae
Class Genus Specific Epithet Related Diseases
Chlamydiae Chlamydia psittaci Psittacosis
Chlamydia trachomatis Sexually transmitted chlamydia
TABLE D3
Phylum Firmicutes
Class Genus Specific Epithet Related Diseases
Bacilli Bacillus anthracis Anthrax
Bacillus cereus Diarrheal and emetic food poisoning
Listeria monocytogenes Listeriosis
Enterococcus faecalis Endocarditis, septicemia, urinary tract infections, meningitis
Staphylococcus aureus Skin infections, sinusitis, food poisoning
Staphylococcus epidermidis Nosocomial and opportunistic infections
Staphylococcus hominis Opportunistic infections
Staphylococcus saprophyticus Urinary tract infections
Streptococcus agalactiae Postpartum infection, neonatal sepsis
Streptococcus mutans Tooth decay
Streptococcus pneumoniae Pneumonia, many other infections
Streptococcus pyogenes Pharyngitis, scarlet fever, impetigo, necrotizing fasciittis
Clostridia Clostridioides botulinum Botulinum poisoning
Clostridium difficile Colitis
Clostridium perfringens Food poisoning, gas gangrene
Clostridium tetani Tetanus
TABLE D4
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1137 ===
D • Taxonomy of Clinically Relevant Microorganisms 1123
Phylum Fusobacteria
Class Genus Specific Epithet Related Diseases
Fusobacteriia Fusobacterium Periodontal disease, Lemierre syndrome, skin ulcers
Streptobacillus moniliformis Rat-bite fever
TABLE D5
Phylum Proteobacteria
Class Genus Specific Epithet Related Diseases
Alphaproteobacteria Anaplasma phagocytophilum Human granulocytic
anaplasmosis
Bartonella henselae Peliosis hepatitis,
bacillary angiomatosis,
endocarditis,
bacteremia
Bartonella quintana Trench fever
Brucella melitensis Ovine brucellosis
Ehrlichia chaffeensis Human monocytic
ehrlichiosis
Rickettsia prowazekii Epidemic typhus
Rickettsia rickettsii Rocky Mountain spotted
fever
Rickettsia typhi Murine typhus
Betaproteobacteria Bordetella pertussis Pertussis
Eikenella Bite-injury infections
Neisseria gonorrhoeae Gonorrhea
Neisseria meningitidis Meningitis
Spirillum minus (alt. minor) Sodoku (rat-bite fever)
Epsilonproteobacteria Campylobacter jejuni Gastroenteritis,
Guillain-Barré
syndrome
Helicobacter pylori Gastric ulcers
TABLE D6
=== PDF PAGE 1138 ===
1124 D • Taxonomy of Clinically Relevant Microorganisms
Phylum Proteobacteria
Class Genus Specific Epithet Related Diseases
Gammaproteobacteria Aeromonas hydrophila Dysenteric
gastroenteritis
Enterobacter Urinary and respiratory
infections
Coxiella burnetii Q fever
Escherichia coli Foodborne diarrhea
Strains: outbreaks, hemorrhagic
shiga toxin-producing (STEC) (e.g., colitis, hemolytic-
O157:H7) also called enterohemorrhagic uremic syndrome
E. coli (EHEC) or verocytotoxin-producing
E. coli (VTEC)
Escherichia coli Traveler’s diarrhea
Strain:
enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC)
Escherichia coli Diarrhea, especially in
Strain: young children
enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC)
Escherichia coli Diarrheal disease in
Strain: children and travelers
enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC)
Escherichia coli Diarrheal disease of
Strain: children
diffusely adherent E. coli (DAEC)
Escherichia coli Bacillary dysentery,
Strain: cells invade intestinal
enteroinvasive E. coli (EPEC) epithelial cells
Francisella tularensis Tularemia
Haemophilus ducreyi Chancroid
Haemophilus influenzae Bacteremia,
pneumonia, meningitis
Klebsiella pneumoniae Pneumonia, nosocomial
infections
Legionella pneumophila Legionnaire’s disease
TABLE D6
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 1139 ===
D • Taxonomy of Clinically Relevant Microorganisms 1125
Phylum Proteobacteria
Class Genus Specific Epithet Related Diseases
Moraxella catarrhalis Otitis media, bronchitis,
sinusitis, laryngitis,
pneumonia
Pasteurella Pasteurellosis
Plesiomonas shigelloides Gastroenteritis
Proteus Opportunistic urinary
tract infections
Pseudomonas aeruginosa Opportunistic,
nosocomial pneumonia
and sepsis
Salmonella bongori Salmonellosis
Salmonella enterica Salmonellosis
Serratia Pneumonia, urinary
tract infections
Shigella boydii Dysentery
Shigella dysenteriae Dysentery
Shigella flexneri Dysentery
Shigella sonnei Dysentery
Vibrio cholerae Cholera
Vibrio parahemolyticus Seafood gastroenteritis
Vibrio vulnificus Seafood gastroenteritis,
necrotizing wound
infections, septicemia
Yersinia enterocolitica Yersiniosis
Yersinia pestis Plague
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis Far East scarlet-like
fever
TABLE D6
=== PDF PAGE 1140 ===
1126 D • Taxonomy of Clinically Relevant Microorganisms
Phylum Spirochaetes
Class Genus Specific Epithet Related Diseases
Spirochaetia Borrelia burgdorferi Lyme disease
Borrelia hermsii Tick-borne relapsing fever
Borrelia recurrentis Louse-borne relapsing fever
Leptospira interrogans Leptospirosis
Treponema pallidum Syphilis, bejel, pinta, yaws
TABLE D7
Phylum Tenericutes
Class Genus Specific Epithet Related Diseases
Mollicutes Mycoplasma genitalium Urethritis, cervicitis
Mycoplasma hominis Pelvic inflammatory disease, bacterial vaginosis
Mycoplasma pneumoniae Mycoplasma pneumonia
Ureaplasma urealyticum Urethritis, fetal infections
TABLE D8
Viral Pathogens
There are several classification systems for viruses. The International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) is
the international scientific body responsible for the rules of viral classification. The ICTV system used here groups
viruses based on genetic similarity and presumed monophyly. The viral classification system is separate from the
classification system for cellular organisms. The ICTV system groups viruses within seven orders, which contain
related families. There is, presently, a large number of unassigned families with unknown affinities to the seven
orders. Three of these orders infect only Eubacteria, Archaea, or plants and do not appear in this table. Some
families may be divided into subfamilies. There are also many unassigned genera. Like all taxonomies, viral
taxonomy is in constant flux. The latest complete species list and classification can be obtained on the ICTV
2
website.
2 International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. “ICTV Master Species List.” http://talk.ictvonline.org/files/ictv_documents/m/msl/
default.aspx
Access for free at openstax.org