=== PDF PAGE 143 ===
CHAPTER 4
Prokaryotic Diversity
FIGURE 4.1 The bacterium Shewanella lives in the deep sea, where there is little oxygen diffused in the water. It is able to survive in this
harsh environment by attaching to the sea floor and using long appendages, called “nanocables,” to sense oxygen. (credit a: modification
of work by NASA; credit b: modification of work by Liza Gross)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
4.1 Prokaryote Habitats, Relationships, and Microbiomes
4.2 Proteobacteria
4.3 Nonproteobacteria Gram-Negative Bacteria and Phototrophic Bacteria
4.4 Gram-Positive Bacteria
4.5 Deeply Branching Bacteria
4.6 Archaea
INTRODUCTION Scientists have studied prokaryotes for centuries, but it wasn’t until 1966 that scientist Thomas
Brock (1926–2021) discovered that certain bacteria can live in boiling water. This led many to wonder whether
prokaryotes may also live in other extreme environments, such as at the bottom of the ocean, at high altitudes, or
inside volcanoes, or even on other planets.
Prokaryotes have an important role in changing, shaping, and sustaining the entire biosphere. They can produce
proteins and other substances used by molecular biologists in basic research and in medicine and industry. For
example, the bacterium Shewanella lives in the deep sea, where oxygen is scarce. It grows long appendages, which
have special sensors used to seek the limited oxygen in its environment. It can also digest toxic waste and generate
electricity. Other species of prokaryotes can produce more oxygen than the entire Amazon rainforest, while still
others supply plants, animals, and humans with usable forms of nitrogen; and inhabit our body, protecting us from
harmful microorganisms and producing some vitally important substances. This chapter will examine the diversity,
structure, and function of prokaryotes.
4.1 Prokaryote Habitats, Relationships, and Microbiomes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify and describe unique examples of prokaryotes in various habitats on earth
• Identify and describe symbiotic relationships
• Compare normal/commensal/resident microbiota to transient microbiota
• Explain how prokaryotes are classified
=== PDF PAGE 144 ===
130 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 1
Marsha, a 20-year-old university student, recently returned to the United States from a trip to Nigeria, where she
had interned as a medical assistant for an organization working to improve access to laboratory services for
tuberculosis testing. When she returned, Marsha began to feel fatigue, which she initially attributed to jet lag.
However, the fatigue persisted, and Marsha soon began to experience other bothersome symptoms, such as
occasional coughing, night sweats, loss of appetite, and a low-grade fever of 37.4 °C (99.3 °F).
Marsha expected her symptoms would subside in a few days, but instead, they gradually became more severe.
About two weeks after returning home, she coughed up some sputum and noticed that it contained blood and
small whitish clumps resembling cottage cheese. Her fever spiked to 38.2 °C (100.8 °F), and she began feeling
sharp pains in her chest when breathing deeply. Concerned that she seemed to be getting worse, Marsha
scheduled an appointment with her physician.
• Could Marsha’s symptoms be related to her overseas travel, even several weeks after returning home?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.
All living organisms are classified into three domains of life: Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya. In this chapter, we will
focus on the domains Archaea and Bacteria. Archaea and bacteria are unicellular prokaryotic organisms. Unlike
eukaryotes, they have no nuclei or any other membrane-bound organelles.
Prokaryote Habitats and Functions
Prokaryotes are ubiquitous. They can be found everywhere on our planet, even in hot springs, in the Antarctic ice
shield, and under extreme pressure two miles under water. One bacterium, Paracoccus denitrificans, has even been
shown to survive when scientists removed it from its native environment (soil) and centrifuged it to 2.4 g, equivalent
to the gravitational force on the surface of Jupiter.
Prokaryotes also are abundant on and within the human body. It has been estimated that prokaryotes, especially
1
bacteria, outnumber nucleated human cells 10:1. More recent studies suggest the ratio could be closer to 1:1, but
2
even that ratio means that there are a great number of bacteria within the human body. Bacteria thrive in the
human mouth, nasal cavity, throat, ears, gastrointestinal tract, and vagina. Large colonies of bacteria can be found
on healthy human skin, especially in moist areas (armpits, navel, and areas behind ears). However, even drier areas
of the skin are not free from bacteria.
The existence of prokaryotes is very important for the stability and thriving of ecosystems. For example, they are a
necessary part of soil formation and stabilization processes through the breakdown of organic matter and
development of biofilms. One gram of soil contains up to 10 billion microorganisms (most of them prokaryotic)
belonging to about 1,000 species. Many species of bacteria use substances released from plant roots, such as acids
and carbohydrates, as nutrients. The bacteria metabolize these plant substances and release the products of
bacterial metabolism back to the soil, forming humus and thus increasing the soil’s fertility. In salty lakes such as
the Dead Sea (Figure 4.2), salt-loving halobacteria decompose dead brine shrimp and nourish young brine shrimp
and flies with the products of bacterial metabolism.
1 R. Sender et al. "Revised Estimates for the Number of Human and Bacteria Cells in the Body." PLoS Biology 14 no. 8 (August 19, 2016):
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002533.
2 A. Abbott. “Scientists Bust Myth That Our Bodies Have More Bacteria Than Human Cells: Decades-Old Assumption about Microbiota
Revisited.” Nature. http://www.nature.com/news/scientists-bust-myth-that-our-bodies-have-more-bacteria-than-human-cells-1.19136.
Accessed June 3, 2016.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 145 ===
4.1 • Prokaryote Habitats, Relationships, and Microbiomes 131
FIGURE 4.2 (a) Some prokaryotes, called halophiles, can thrive in extremely salty environments such as the Dead Sea, pictured here. (b)
The archaeon Halobacterium salinarum, shown here in an electron micrograph, is a halophile that lives in the Dead Sea. (credit a:
modification of work by Jullen Menichini; credit b: modification of work by NASA)
In addition to living in the ground and the water, prokaryotic microorganisms are abundant in the air, even high in the
atmosphere. There may be up to 2,000 different kinds of bacteria in the air, similar to their diversity in the soil.
Prokaryotes can be found everywhere on earth because they are extremely resilient and adaptable. They are often
metabolically flexible, which means that they might easily switch from one energy source to another, depending on
the availability of the sources, or from one metabolic pathway to another. For example, certain prokaryotic
cyanobacteria can switch from a conventional type of lipid metabolism, which includes production of fatty
aldehydes, to a different type of lipid metabolism that generates biofuel, such as fatty acids and wax esters.
Groundwater bacteria store complex high-energy carbohydrates when grown in pure groundwater, but they
metabolize these molecules when the groundwater is enriched with phosphates. Some bacteria get their energy by
reducing sulfates into sulfides, but can switch to a different metabolic pathway when necessary, producing acids
and free hydrogen ions.
Prokaryotes perform functions vital to life on earth by capturing (or “fixing”) and recycling elements like carbon and
nitrogen. Organisms such as animals require organic carbon to grow, but, unlike prokaryotes, they are unable to use
inorganic carbon sources like carbon dioxide. Thus, animals rely on prokaryotes to convert carbon dioxide into
organic carbon products that they can use. This process of converting carbon dioxide to organic carbon products is
called carbon fixation.
Plants and animals also rely heavily on prokaryotes for nitrogen fixation, the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen into
ammonia, a compound that some plants can use to form many different biomolecules necessary to their survival.
Bacteria in the genus Rhizobium, for example, are nitrogen-fixing bacteria; they live in the roots of legume plants
such as clover, alfalfa, and peas (Figure 4.3). Ammonia produced by Rhizobium helps these plants to survive by
enabling them to make building blocks of nucleic acids. In turn, these plants may be eaten by animals—sustaining
their growth and survival—or they may die, in which case the products of nitrogen fixation will enrich the soil and be
used by other plants.
=== PDF PAGE 146 ===
132 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
FIGURE 4.3 (a) Nitrogen-fixing bacteria such as Rhizobium live in the root nodules of legumes such as clover. (b) This micrograph of the
root nodule shows bacteroids (bacterium-like cells or modified bacterial cells) within the plant cells. The bacteroids are visible as darker
ovals within the larger plant cell. (credit a: modification of work by USDA)
Another positive function of prokaryotes is in cleaning up the environment. Recently, some researchers focused on
the diversity and functions of prokaryotes in manmade environments. They found that some bacteria play a unique
3
role in degrading toxic chemicals that pollute water and soil.
Despite all of the positive and helpful roles prokaryotes play, some are human pathogens that may cause illness or
infection when they enter the body. In addition, some bacteria can contaminate food, causing spoilage or foodborne
illness, which makes them subjects of concern in food preparation and safety. Less than 1% of prokaryotes (all of
them bacteria) are thought to be human pathogens, but collectively these species are responsible for a large
number of the diseases that afflict humans.
Besides pathogens, which have a direct impact on human health, prokaryotes also affect humans in many indirect
ways. For example, prokaryotes are now thought to be key players in the processes of climate change. In recent
years, as temperatures in the earth’s polar regions have risen, soil that was formerly frozen year-round (permafrost)
has begun to thaw. Carbon trapped in the permafrost is gradually released and metabolized by prokaryotes. This
produces massive amounts of carbon dioxide and methane, greenhouse gases that escape into the atmosphere and
contribute to the greenhouse effect.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• In what types of environments can prokaryotes be found?
• Name some ways that plants and animals rely on prokaryotes.
Symbiotic Relationships
As we have learned, prokaryotic microorganisms can associate with plants and animals. Often, this association
results in unique relationships between organisms. For example, bacteria living on the roots or leaves of a plant get
nutrients from the plant and, in return, produce substances that protect the plant from pathogens. On the other
hand, some bacteria are plant pathogens that use mechanisms of infection similar to bacterial pathogens of animals
and humans.
Prokaryotes live in a community, or a group of interacting populations of organisms. A population is a group of
individual organisms belonging to the same biological species and limited to a certain geographic area. Populations
can have cooperative interactions, which benefit the populations, or competitive interactions, in which one
population competes with another for resources. The study of these interactions between microbial populations and
their environment is called microbial ecology.
Any interaction between different species that are associated with each other within a community is called
symbiosis. Such interactions fall along a continuum between opposition and cooperation. Interactions in a
3 A.M. Kravetz “Unique Bacteria Fights Man-Made Chemical Waste.” 2012. http://www.livescience.com/25181-bacteria-strain-cleans-up-
toxins-nsf-bts.html. Accessed March 9, 2015.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 147 ===
4.1 • Prokaryote Habitats, Relationships, and Microbiomes 133
symbiotic relationship may be beneficial or harmful, or have no effect on one or both of the species involved. Table
4.1 summarizes the main types of symbiotic interactions among prokaryotes.
Types of Symbiotic Relationships
Type Population A Population B
Mutualism Benefitted Benefitted
Amensalism Harmed Unaffected
Commensalism Benefitted Unaffected
Neutralism Unaffected Unaffected
Parasitism Benefitted Harmed
TABLE 4.1
When two species benefit from each other, the symbiosis is called mutualism (or syntropy, or crossfeeding). For
example, humans have a mutualistic relationship with the bacterium Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, which lives in
the intestinal tract. Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron digests complex polysaccharide plant materials that human
digestive enzymes cannot break down, converting them into monosaccharides that can be absorbed by human cells.
Humans also have a mutualistic relationship with certain strains of Escherichia coli, another bacterium found in the
gut. E. coli relies on intestinal contents for nutrients, and humans derive certain vitamins from E. coli, particularly
vitamin K, which is required for the formation of blood clotting factors. (This is only true for some strains of E. coli,
however. Other strains are pathogenic and do not have a mutualistic relationship with humans.)
A type of symbiosis in which one population harms another but remains unaffected itself is called amensalism. In
the case of bacteria, some amensalist species produce bactericidal substances that kill other species of bacteria.
The microbiota of the skin is composed of a variety of bacterial species, including Staphylococcus epidermidis and
Cutibacterium acnes. Although both species have the potential to cause infectious diseases when protective
barriers are breached, they both produce a variety of antibacterial bacteriocins and bacteriocin-like compounds. S.
epidermidis and C. acnes are unaffected by the bacteriocins and bacteriocin-like compounds they produce, but
these compounds can target and kill other potential pathogens.
In another type of symbiosis, called commensalism, one organism benefits while the other is unaffected. This
occurs when the bacterium Staphylococcus epidermidis uses the dead cells of the human skin as nutrients. Billions
of these bacteria live on our skin, but in most cases (especially when our immune system is healthy), we do not react
to them in any way. S. epidermidis provides an excellent example of how the classifications of symbiotic
relationships are not always distinct. One could also consider the symbiotic relationship of S. epidermidis with
humans as mutualism. Humans provide a food source of dead skin cells to the bacterium, and in turn the production
of bacteriocin can provide an defense against potential pathogens.
If neither of the symbiotic organisms is affected in any way, we call this type of symbiosis neutralism. An example of
neutralism is the coexistence of metabolically active (vegetating) bacteria and endospores (dormant, metabolically
passive bacteria). For example, the bacterium Bacillus anthracis typically forms endospores in soil when conditions
are unfavorable. If the soil is warmed and enriched with nutrients, some B. anthracis endospores germinate and
remain in symbiosis with other species of endospores that have not germinated.
A type of symbiosis in which one organism benefits while harming the other is called parasitism. The relationship
between humans and many pathogenic prokaryotes can be characterized as parasitic because these organisms
invade the body, producing toxic substances or infectious diseases that cause harm. Diseases such as tetanus,
diphtheria, pertussis, tuberculosis, and leprosy all arise from interactions between bacteria and humans.
Scientists have coined the term microbiome to refer to all prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms and their
genetic material that are associated with a certain organism or environment. Within the human microbiome, there
=== PDF PAGE 148 ===
134 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
are resident microbiota and transient microbiota. The resident microbiota consists of microorganisms that
constantly live in or on our bodies. The term transient microbiota refers to microorganisms that are only temporarily
found in the human body, and these may include pathogenic microorganisms. Hygiene and diet can alter both the
resident and transient microbiota.
The resident microbiota is amazingly diverse, not only in terms of the variety of species but also in terms of the
preference of different microorganisms for different areas of the human body. For example, in the human mouth,
there are thousands of commensal or mutualistic species of bacteria. Some of these bacteria prefer to inhabit the
surface of the tongue, whereas others prefer the internal surface of the cheeks, and yet others prefer the front or
back teeth or gums. The inner surface of the cheek has the least diverse microbiota because of its exposure to
oxygen. By contrast, the crypts of the tongue and the spaces between teeth are two sites with limited oxygen
exposure, so these sites have more diverse microbiota, including bacteria living in the absence of oxygen (e.g.,
Bacteroides, Fusobacterium). Differences in the oral microbiota between randomly chosen human individuals are
also significant. Studies have shown, for example, that the prevalence of such bacteria as Streptococcus,
4
Haemophilus, Neisseria, and others was dramatically different when compared between individuals.
There are also significant differences between the microbiota of different sites of the same human body. The inner
surface of the cheek has a predominance of Streptococcus, whereas in the throat, the palatine tonsil, and saliva,
there are two to three times fewer Streptococcus, and several times more Fusobacterium. In the plaque removed
from gums, the predominant bacteria belong to the genus Fusobacterium. However, in the intestine, both
Streptococcus and Fusobacterium disappear, and the genus Bacteroides becomes predominant.
Not only can the microbiota vary from one body site to another, the microbiome can also change over time within the
same individual. Humans acquire their first inoculations of normal flora during natural birth and shortly after birth.
Before birth, there is a rapid increase in the population of Lactobacillus spp. in the vagina, and this population serves
as the first colonization of microbiota during natural birth. After birth, additional microbes are acquired from health-
care providers, parents, other relatives, and individuals who come in contact with the baby. This process establishes
a microbiome that will continue to evolve over the course of the individual’s life as new microbes colonize and are
eliminated from the body. For example, it is estimated that within a 9-hour period, the microbiota of the small
5
intestine can change so that half of the microbial inhabitants will be different. The importance of the initial
Lactobacillus colonization during vaginal child birth is highlighted by studies demonstrating a higher incidence of
diseases in individuals born by cesarean section, compared to those born vaginally. Studies have shown that babies
born vaginally are predominantly colonized by vaginal lactobacillus, whereas babies born by cesarean section are
more frequently colonized by microbes of the normal skin microbiota, including common hospital-acquired
pathogens.
Throughout the body, resident microbiotas are important for human health because they occupy niches that might
be otherwise taken by pathogenic microorganisms. For instance, Lactobacillus spp. are the dominant bacterial
species of the normal vaginal microbiota for most females. lactobacillus produce lactic acid, contributing to the
acidity of the vagina and inhibiting the growth of pathogenic yeasts. However, when the population of the resident
microbiota is decreased for some reason (e.g., because of taking antibiotics), the pH of the vagina increases, making
it a more favorable environment for the growth of yeasts such as Candida albicans. Antibiotic therapy can also
disrupt the microbiota of the intestinal tract and respiratory tract, increasing the risk for secondary infections and/or
promoting the long-term carriage and shedding of pathogens.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Explain the difference between cooperative and competitive interactions in microbial communities.
• List the types of symbiosis and explain how each population is affected.
Taxonomy and Systematics
Assigning prokaryotes to a certain species is challenging. They do not reproduce sexually, so it is not possible to
4 E.M. Bik et al. “Bacterial Diversity in the Oral Cavity of 10 Healthy Individuals.” The ISME Journal 4 no. 8 (2010):962–974.
5 C.C. Booijink et al. “High Temporal and Intra-Individual Variation Detected in the Human Ileal Microbiota.” Environmental Microbiology
12 no. 12 (2010):3213–3227.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 149 ===
4.1 • Prokaryote Habitats, Relationships, and Microbiomes 135
classify them according to the presence or absence of interbreeding. Also, they do not have many morphological
features. Traditionally, the classification of prokaryotes was based on their shape, staining patterns, and
biochemical or physiological differences. More recently, as technology has improved, the nucleotide sequences in
genes have become an important criterion of microbial classification.
In 1923, American microbiologist David Hendricks Bergey (1860–1937) published A Manual in Determinative
Bacteriology. With this manual, he attempted to summarize the information about the kinds of bacteria known at
that time, using Latin binomial classification. Bergey also included the morphological, physiological, and
biochemical properties of these organisms. His manual has been updated multiple times to include newer bacteria
and their properties. It is a great aid in bacterial taxonomy and methods of characterization of bacteria. A more
recent sister publication, the five-volume Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology, expands on Bergey’s original
manual. It includes a large number of additional species, along with up-to-date descriptions of the taxonomy and
biological properties of all named prokaryotic taxa. This publication incorporates the approved names of bacteria as
determined by the List of Prokaryotic Names with Standing in Nomenclature (LPSN).
LINK TO LEARNING
The 7th edition (published in 1957) of Bergey’s Manual of Determinative Bacteriology is now available
(https://openstax.org/l/22mandeterbact). More recent, updated editions are available in print.
Classification by Staining Patterns
According to their staining patterns, which depend on the properties of their cell walls, bacteria have traditionally
been classified into gram-positive, gram-negative, and “atypical,” meaning neither gram-positive nor gram-negative.
As explained in Staining Microscopic Specimens, gram-positive bacteria possess a thick peptidoglycan cell wall that
retains the primary stain (crystal violet) during the decolorizing step; they remain purple after the gram-stain
procedure because the crystal violet dominates the light red/pink color of the secondary counterstain, safranin. In
contrast, gram-negative bacteria possess a thin peptidoglycan cell wall that does not prevent the crystal violet from
washing away during the decolorizing step; therefore, they appear light red/pink after staining with the safranin.
Bacteria that cannot be stained by the standard Gram stain procedure are called atypical bacteria. Included in the
atypical category are species of Mycoplasma and Chlamydia. Rickettsia are also considered atypical because they
are too small to be evaluated by the Gram stain.
More recently, scientists have begun to further classify gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. They have added
a special group of deeply branching bacteria based on a combination of physiological, biochemical, and genetic
features. They also now further classify gram-negative bacteria into Proteobacteria, Cytophaga-Flavobacterium-
Bacteroides (CFB), and spirochetes.
The deeply branching bacteria are thought to be a very early evolutionary form of bacteria (see Deeply Branching
Bacteria). They live in hot, acidic, ultraviolet-light-exposed, and anaerobic (deprived of oxygen) conditions.
Proteobacteria is a phylum of very diverse groups of gram-negative bacteria; it includes some important human
pathogens (e.g., E. coli and Bordetella pertussis). The CFB group of bacteria includes components of the normal
human gut microbiota, like Bacteroides. The spirochetes are spiral-shaped bacteria and include the pathogen
Treponema pallidum, which causes syphilis. We will characterize these groups of bacteria in more detail later in the
chapter.
Based on their prevalence of guanine and cytosine nucleotides, gram-positive bacteria are also classified into low
G+C and high G+C gram-positive bacteria. The low G+C gram-positive bacteria have less than 50% of guanine and
cytosine nucleotides in their DNA. They include human pathogens, such as those that cause anthrax (Bacillus
anthracis), tetanus (Clostridium tetani), and listeriosis (Listeria monocytogenes). High G+C gram-positive bacteria,
which have more than 50% guanine and cytosine nucleotides in their DNA, include the bacteria that cause
diphtheria (Corynebacterium diphtheriae), tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis), and other diseases.
The classifications of prokaryotes are constantly changing as new species are being discovered. We will describe
them in more detail, along with the diseases they cause, in later sections and chapters.
=== PDF PAGE 150 ===
136 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How do scientists classify prokaryotes?
MICRO CONNECTIONS
Human Microbiome Project
The Human Microbiome Project was launched by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in 2008. One main goal of
the project is to create a large repository of the gene sequences of important microbes found in humans, helping
biologists and clinicians understand the dynamics of the human microbiome and the relationship between the
human microbiota and diseases. A network of labs working together has been compiling the data from swabs of
several areas of the skin, gut, and mouth from hundreds of individuals.
One of the challenges in understanding the human microbiome has been the difficulty of culturing many of the
microbes that inhabit the human body. It has been estimated that we are only able to culture 1% of the bacteria in
nature and that we are unable to grow the remaining 99%. To address this challenge, researchers have used
metagenomic analysis, which studies genetic material harvested directly from microbial communities, as opposed
to that of individual species grown in a culture. This allows researchers to study the genetic material of all microbes
6
in the microbiome, rather than just those that can be cultured.
One important achievement of the Human Microbiome Project is establishing the first reference database on
microorganisms living in and on the human body. Many of the microbes in the microbiome are beneficial, but some
are not. It was found, somewhat unexpectedly, that all of us have some serious microbial pathogens in our
microbiota. For example, the conjunctiva of the human eye contains 24 genera of bacteria and numerous pathogenic
7
species. A healthy human mouth contains a number of species of the genus Streptococcus, including pathogenic
8
species S. pyogenes and S. pneumoniae. This raises the question of why certain prokaryotic organisms exist
commensally in certain individuals but act as deadly pathogens in others. Also unexpected was the number of
organisms that had never been cultured. For example, in one metagenomic study of the human gut microbiota, 174
9
new species of bacteria were identified.
Another goal for the near future is to characterize the human microbiota in patients with different diseases and to
find out whether there are any relationships between the contents of an individual’s microbiota and risk for or
susceptibility to specific diseases. Analyzing the microbiome in a person with a specific disease may reveal new
ways to fight diseases.
4.2 Proteobacteria
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the unique features of each class within the phylum Proteobacteria: Alphaproteobacteria,
Betaproteobacteria, Gammaproteobacteria, Deltaproteobacteria, and Epsilonproteobacteria
• Give an example of a bacterium in each class of Proteobacteria
6 National Institutes of Health. “Human Microbiome Project. Overview.” http://commonfund.nih.gov/hmp/overview. Accessed June 7,
2016.
7 Q. Dong et al. “Diversity of Bacteria at Healthy Human Conjunctiva.” Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science 52 no. 8
(2011):5408–5413.
8 F.E. Dewhirst et al. “The Human Oral Microbiome.” Journal of Bacteriology 192 no. 19 (2010):5002–5017.
9 J.C. Lagier et al. “Microbial Culturomics: Paradigm Shift in the Human Gut Microbiome Study.” Clinical Microbiology and Infection 18 no.
12 (2012):1185–1193.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 151 ===
4.2 • Proteobacteria 137
In 1987, the American microbiologist Carl Woese (1928–2012) suggested that a large and diverse group of bacteria
that he called “purple bacteria and their relatives” should be defined as a separate phylum within the domain
10
Bacteria based on the similarity of the nucleotide sequences in their genome. This phylum of gram-negative
bacteria subsequently received the name Proteobacteria. It includes many bacteria that are part of the normal
human microbiota as well as many pathogens. The Proteobacteria are further divided into five classes:
Alphaproteobacteria, Betaproteobacteria, Gammaproteobacteria, Deltaproteobacteria, and Epsilonproteobacteria
(Appendix D).
Alphaproteobacteria
The first class of Proteobacteria is the Alphaproteobacteria, many of which are obligate or facultative intracellular
bacteria. Some species are characterized as oligotrophs, organisms capable of living in low-nutrient environments
such as deep oceanic sediments, glacial ice, or deep undersurface soil.
Among the Alphaproteobacteria are rickettsias, obligate intracellular pathogens, that require part of their life cycle
to occur inside other cells called host cells. When not growing inside a host cell, Rickettsia are metabolically inactive
outside the host cell. They cannot synthesize their own adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and, therefore, rely on cells
for their energy needs.
Rickettsia spp. include a number of serious human pathogens. For example, R. rickettsii causes Rocky Mountain
spotted fever, a life-threatening form of meningoencephalitis (inflammation of the membranes that wrap the brain).
R. rickettsii infects ticks and can be transmitted to humans via a bite from an infected tick (Figure 4.4).
FIGURE 4.4 Rickettsias require special staining methods to see them under a microscope. Here, R. rickettsii, which causes Rocky Mountain
spotted fever, is shown infecting the cells of a tick. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Another species of Rickettsia, R. prowazekii, is spread by lice. It causes epidemic typhus, a severe infectious disease
common during warfare and mass migrations of people. R. prowazekii infects human endothelium cells, causing
inflammation of the inner lining of blood vessels, high fever, abdominal pain, and sometimes delirium. A relative, R.
typhi, causes a less severe disease known as murine or endemic typhus, which is still observed in the southwestern
United States during warm seasons.
Table 4.2 summarizes the characteristics of important genera of Alphaproteobacteria.
10 C.R. Woese. “Bacterial Evolution.” Microbiological Review 51 no. 2 (1987):221–271.
=== PDF PAGE 152 ===
138 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
Class Alphaproteobacteria
Genus Microscopic Unique Characteristics
Morphology
Agrobacterium Gram-negative bacillus Plant pathogen; one species, A. tumefaciens, causes tumors in
plants
Bartonella Gram-negative, Facultative intracellular bacteria, transmitted by lice and fleas,
pleomorphic, flagellated cause trench fever and cat scratch disease in humans
coccobacillus
Brucella Gram-negative, small, Facultative intracellular bacteria, transmitted by contaminated
flagellated coccobacillus milk from infected cows, cause brucellosis in cattle and
humans
Caulobacter Gram-negative bacillus Used in studies on cellular adaptation and differentiation
because of its peculiar life cycle (during cell division, forms
“swarm” cells and “stalked” cells)
Ehrlichia Very small, gram- Obligatory intracellular bacteria; can be transported from cell to
negative, coccoid or cell; transmitted by ticks; cause ehrlichiosis (destruction of
ovoid bacteria white blood cells and inflammation) in humans and dogs
Hyphomicrobium Gram-negative bacilli; Similar to Caulobacter
grows from a stalk
Methylocystis Gram-negative, coccoid Nitrogen-fixing aerobic bacteria
or short bacilli
Rhizobium Gram-negative, Nitrogen-fixing bacteria that live in soil and form symbiotic
rectangular bacilli with relationship with roots of legumes (e.g., clover, alfalfa, and
rounded ends forming beans)
clusters
Rickettsia Gram-negative, highly Obligate intracellular bacteria; transmitted by ticks; may cause
pleomorphic bacteria Rocky Mountain spotted fever and typhus
(may be cocci, rods, or
threads)
TABLE 4.2
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What is a common characteristic among the human pathogenic Alphaproteobacteria?
Betaproteobacteria
Betaproteobacteria are a diverse group of bacteria. The different bacterial species within this group utilize a wide
range of metabolic strategies and can survive in a range of environments. Some genera include species that are
human pathogens, able to cause severe, sometimes life-threatening disease. The genus Neisseria, for example,
includes the bacteria N. gonorrhoeae, the causative agent of the STI gonorrhea, and N. meningitides, the causative
agent of bacterial meningitis.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 153 ===
4.2 • Proteobacteria 139
Neisseria are cocci that live on mucosal surfaces of the human body. They are fastidious, or difficult to culture, and
they require high levels of moisture, nutrient supplements, and carbon dioxide. Also, Neisseria are microaerophilic,
meaning that they require low levels of oxygen. For optimal growth and for the purposes of identification, Neisseria
spp. are grown on chocolate agar (i.e., agar supplemented by partially hemolyzed red blood cells). Their
characteristic pattern of growth in culture is diplococcal: pairs of cells resembling coffee beans (Figure 4.5).
FIGURE 4.5 Neisseria meningitidis growing in colonies on a chocolate agar plate. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
The pathogen responsible for pertussis (whooping cough) is also a member of Betaproteobacteria. The bacterium
Bordetella pertussis, from the order Burkholderiales, produces several toxins that paralyze the movement of cilia in
the human respiratory tract and directly damage cells of the respiratory tract, causing a severe cough.
Table 4.3 summarizes the characteristics of important genera of Betaproteobacteria.
Class Betaproteobacteria
Example Microscopic Unique Characteristics
Genus Morphology
Bordetella A small, gram-negative Aerobic, very fastidious; B. pertussis causes pertussis (whooping
coccobacillus cough)
Burkholderia Gram-negative bacillus Aerobic, aquatic, cause diseases in horses and humans (especially
patients with cystic fibrosis); agents of nosocomial infections
Leptothrix Gram-negative, Aquatic; oxidize iron and manganese; can live in wastewater
sheathed, filamentous treatment plants and clog pipes
bacillus
Neisseria Gram-negative, coffee Require moisture and high concentration of carbon dioxide; oxidase
bean-shaped coccus positive, grow on chocolate agar; pathogenic species cause
forming pairs gonorrhea and meningitis
Thiobacillus Gram-negative bacillus Thermophilic, acidophilic, strictly aerobic bacteria; oxidize iron and
sulfur
TABLE 4.3
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Why are Neisseria classified as microaerophilic?
=== PDF PAGE 154 ===
140 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 2
When Marsha finally went to the doctor’s office, the physician listened to her breathing through a stethoscope.
He heard some crepitation (a crackling sound) in her lungs, so he ordered a chest radiograph and asked the
nurse to collect a sputum sample for microbiological evaluation and cytology. The radiologic evaluation found
cavities, opacities, and a particular pattern of distribution of abnormal material (Figure 4.6).
• What are some possible diseases that could be responsible for Marsha’s radiograph results?
FIGURE 4.6 This anteroposterior radiograph shows the presence of bilateral pulmonary infiltrate (white triangles) and “caving
formation” (black arrows) present in the right apical region. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
Gammaproteobacteria
The most diverse class of gram-negative bacteria is Gammaproteobacteria, and it includes a number of human
pathogens. For example, a large and diverse family, Pseudomonaceae, includes the genus Pseudomonas. Within this
genus is the species P. aeruginosa, a pathogen responsible for diverse infections in various regions of the body. P.
aeruginosa is a strictly aerobic, nonfermenting, highly motile bacterium. It often infects wounds and burns, can be
the cause of chronic urinary tract infections, and can be an important cause of respiratory infections in patients with
cystic fibrosis or patients on mechanical ventilators. Infections by P. aeruginosa are often difficult to treat because
the bacterium is resistant to many antibiotics and has a remarkable ability to form biofilms. Other representatives of
Pseudomonas include the fluorescent (glowing) bacterium P. fluorescens and the soil bacteria P. putida, which is
known for its ability to degrade xenobiotics (substances not naturally produced or found in living organisms).
The Pasteurellaceae also includes several clinically relevant genera and species. This family includes several
bacteria that are human and/or animal pathogens. For example, Pasteurella haemolytica causes severe pneumonia
in sheep and goats. P. multocida is a species that can be transmitted from animals to humans through bites, causing
infections of the skin and deeper tissues. The genus Haemophilus contains two human pathogens, H. influenzae and
H. ducreyi. Despite its name, H. influenzae does not cause influenza (which is a viral disease). H. influenzae can
cause both upper and lower respiratory tract infections, including sinusitis, bronchitis, ear infections, and
pneumonia. Before the development of effective vaccination, strains of H. influenzae were a leading cause of more
invasive diseases, like meningitis in children. H. ducreyi causes the STI known as chancroid.
The order Vibrionales includes the human pathogen Vibrio cholerae. This comma-shaped aquatic bacterium thrives
in highly alkaline environments like shallow lagoons and sea ports. A toxin produced by V. cholerae causes
hypersecretion of electrolytes and water in the large intestine, leading to profuse watery diarrhea and dehydration.
V. parahaemolyticus is also a cause of gastrointestinal disease in humans, whereas V. vulnificus causes serious and
potentially life-threatening cellulitis (infection of the skin and deeper tissues) and blood-borne infections. Another
representative of Vibrionales, Aliivibrio fischeri, engages in a symbiotic relationship with squid. The squid provides
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 155 ===
4.2 • Proteobacteria 141
nutrients for the bacteria to grow and the bacteria produce bioluminescence that protects the squid from predators
(Figure 4.7).
FIGURE 4.7 (a) Aliivibrio fischeri is a bioluminescent bacterium. (b) A. fischeri colonizes and lives in a mutualistic relationship with the
Hawaiian bobtail squid (Euprymna scolopes). (credit a: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology; credit b: modification of
work by Margaret McFall-Ngai)
The genus Legionella also belongs to the Gammaproteobacteria. L. pneumophila, the pathogen responsible for
Legionnaires disease, is an aquatic bacterium that tends to inhabit pools of warm water, such as those found in the
tanks of air conditioning units in large buildings (Figure 4.8). Because the bacteria can spread in aerosols, outbreaks
of Legionnaires disease often affect residents of a building in which the water has become contaminated with
Legionella. In fact, these bacteria derive their name from the first known outbreak of Legionnaires disease, which
occurred in a hotel hosting an American Legion veterans’ association convention in Philadelphia in 1976.
FIGURE 4.8 (a) Legionella pneumophila, the causative agent of Legionnaires disease, thrives in warm water. (b) Outbreaks of Legionnaires
disease often originate in the air conditioning units of large buildings when water in or near the system becomes contaminated with L.
pneumophila. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Enterobacteriaceae is a large family of enteric (intestinal) bacteria belonging to the Gammaproteobacteria. They are
facultative anaerobes and are able to ferment carbohydrates. Within this family, microbiologists recognize two
distinct categories. The first category is called the coliforms, after its prototypical bacterium species, Escherichia
coli. Coliforms are able to ferment lactose completely (i.e., with the production of acid and gas). The second
category, noncoliforms, either cannot ferment lactose or can only ferment it incompletely (producing either acid or
gas, but not both). The noncoliforms include some notable human pathogens, such as Salmonella spp., Shigella
spp., and Yersinia pestis.
E. coli has been perhaps the most studied bacterium since it was first described in 1886 by Theodor Escherich
(1857–1911). Many strains of E. coli are in mutualistic relationships with humans. However, some strains produce a
potentially deadly toxin called Shiga toxin. Shiga toxin is one of the most potent bacterial toxins identified. Upon
entering target cells, Shiga toxin interacts with ribosomes, stopping protein synthesis. Lack of protein synthesis
leads to cellular death and hemorrhagic colitis, characterized by inflammation of intestinal tract and bloody
diarrhea. In the most severe cases, patients can develop a deadly hemolytic uremic syndrome. Other E. coli strains
may cause traveler’s diarrhea, a less severe but very widespread disease.
=== PDF PAGE 156 ===
142 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
The genus Salmonella, which belongs to the noncoliform group of Enterobacteriaceae, is interesting in that there is
still no consensus about how many species it includes. Scientists have reclassified many of the groups they once
thought to be species as serotypes (also called serovars), which are strains or variations of the same species of
bacteria. Their classification is based on patterns of reactivity by animal antisera against molecules on the surface of
the bacterial cells. A number of serotypes of Salmonella can cause salmonellosis, characterized by inflammation of
the small and the large intestine, accompanied by fever, vomiting, and diarrhea. The species S. enterobacterica
(serovar typhi) causes typhoid fever, with symptoms including fever, abdominal pain, and skin rashes (Figure 4.9).
FIGURE 4.9 Salmonella typhi is the causative agent of typhoid fever. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Table 4.4 summarizes the characteristics of important genera of Gammaproteobacteria.
Class Gammaproteobacteria
Example Microscopic Unique Characteristics
Genus Morphology
Beggiatoa Gram-negative Aquatic, live in water with high content of hydrogen disulfide; can
bacteria; disc-shaped cause problems for sewage treatment
or cylindrical
Coxiella Small, gram-negative Obligatory intracellular bacteria; cause Q fever; potential for use as
bacillus biological weapon
Enterobacter Gram-negative Facultative anaerobe; cause urinary and respiratory tract infections
bacillus in hospitalized patients; implicated in the pathogenesis of obesity
Erwinia Gram-negative Plant pathogen causing leaf spots and discoloration; may digest
bacillus cellulose; prefer relatively low temperatures (25–30 °C)
Escherichia Gram-negative Facultative anaerobe; inhabit the gastrointestinal tract of warm-
bacillus blooded animals; some strains are mutualists, producing vitamin K;
others, like serotype E. coli O157:H7, are pathogens; E. coli has been
a model organism for many studies in genetics and molecular
biology
Hemophilus Gram-negative Pleomorphic, may appear as coccobacillus, aerobe, or facultative
bacillus anaerobe; grow on blood agar; pathogenic species can cause
respiratory infections, chancroid, and other diseases
TABLE 4.4
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 157 ===
4.2 • Proteobacteria 143
Class Gammaproteobacteria
Example Microscopic Unique Characteristics
Genus Morphology
Klebsiella Gram-negative Facultative anaerobe, encapsulated, nonmotile; pathogenic species
bacillus; appears may cause pneumonia, especially in people with alcoholism
rounder and thicker
than other members of
Enterobacteriaceae
Legionella Gram-negative Fastidious, grow on charcoal-buffered yeast extract; L. pneumophila
bacillus causes Legionnaires disease
Methylomonas Gram-negative Use methane as source of carbon and energy
bacillus
Proteus Gram-negative Common inhabitants of the human gastrointestinal tract; motile;
bacillus (pleomorphic) produce urease; opportunistic pathogens; may cause urinary tract
infections and sepsis
Pseudomonas Gram-negative Aerobic; versatile; produce yellow and blue pigments, making them
bacillus appear green in culture; opportunistic, antibiotic-resistant
pathogens may cause wound infections, hospital-acquired
infections, and secondary infections in patients with cystic fibrosis
Serratia Gram-negative Motile; may produce red pigment; opportunistic pathogens
bacillus responsible for a large number of hospital-acquired infections
Shigella Gram-negative Nonmotile; dangerously pathogenic; produce Shiga toxin, which can
bacillus destroy cells of the gastrointestinal tract; can cause dysentery
Vibrio Gram-negative, Inhabit seawater; flagellated, motile; may produce toxin that causes
comma- or curved hypersecretion of water and electrolytes in the gastrointestinal tract;
rod-shaped bacteria some species may cause serious wound infections
Yersinia Gram-negative Carried by rodents; human pathogens; Y. pestis causes bubonic
bacillus plague and pneumonic plague; Y. enterocolitica can be a pathogen
causing diarrhea in humans
TABLE 4.4
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• List two families of Gammaproteobacteria.
Deltaproteobacteria
The Deltaproteobacteria is a small class of gram-negative Proteobacteria that includes sulfate-reducing bacteria
(SRBs), so named because they use sulfate as the final electron acceptor in the electron transport chain. Few SRBs
are pathogenic. However, the SRB Desulfovibrio orale is associated with periodontal disease (disease of the gums).
Deltaproteobacteria also includes the genus Bdellovibrio, species of which are parasites of other gram-negative
bacteria. Bdellovibrio invades the cells of the host bacterium, positioning itself in the periplasm, the space between
=== PDF PAGE 158 ===
144 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
the plasma membrane and the cell wall, feeding on the host’s proteins and polysaccharides. The infection is lethal
for the host cells.
Another type of Deltaproteobacteria, myxobacteria, lives in the soil, scavenging inorganic compounds. Motile and
highly social, they interact with other bacteria within and outside their own group. They can form multicellular,
macroscopic “fruiting bodies” (Figure 4.10), structures that are still being studied by biologists and bacterial
11
ecologists. These bacteria can also form metabolically inactive myxospores.
FIGURE 4.10 Myxobacteria form fruiting bodies. (credit: modification of work by Michiel Vos)
Table 4.5 summarizes the characteristics of several important genera of Deltaproteobacteria.
Class Deltaproteobacteria
Genus Microscopic Morphology Unique characteristics
Bdellovibrio Gram-negative, comma- Obligate aerobes; motile; parasitic (infecting other
shaped rod bacteria)
Desulfovibrio Gram-negative, comma- Reduce sulfur; can be used for removal of toxic and
(formerly shaped rod radioactive waste
Desufuromonas)
Myxobacterium Gram-negative, coccoid Live in soil; can move by gliding; used as a model
bacteria forming colonies organism for studies of intercellular communication
(swarms) (signaling)
TABLE 4.5
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What type of Deltaproteobacteria forms fruiting bodies?
Epsilonproteobacteria
The smallest class of Proteobacteria is Epsilonproteobacteria, which are gram-negative microaerophilic bacteria
(meaning they only require small amounts of oxygen in their environment). Two clinically relevant genera of
11 H. Reichenbach. “Myxobacteria, Producers of Novel Bioactive Substances.” Journal of Industrial Microbiology & Biotechnology 27 no. 3
(2001):149–156.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 159 ===
4.2 • Proteobacteria 145
Epsilonproteobacteria are Campylobacter and Helicobacter, both of which include human pathogens.
Campylobacter can cause food poisoning that manifests as severe enteritis (inflammation in the small intestine).
This condition, caused by the species C. jejuni, is rather common in developed countries, usually because of eating
contaminated poultry products. Chickens often harbor C. jejuni in their gastrointestinal tract and feces, and their
meat can become contaminated during processing.
Within the genus Helicobacter, the helical, flagellated bacterium H. pylori has been identified as a beneficial
member of the stomach microbiota, but it is also the most common cause of chronic gastritis and ulcers of the
12
stomach and duodenum (Figure 4.11). Studies have also shown that H. pylori is linked to stomach cancer. H.
pylori is somewhat unusual in its ability to survive in the highly acidic environment of the stomach. It produces
urease and other enzymes that modify its environment to make it less acidic.
FIGURE 4.11 Helicobacter pylori can cause chronic gastritis, which can lead to ulcers and stomach cancer.
Table 4.6 summarizes the characteristics of the most clinically relevant genera of Epsilonproteobacteria.
Class Epsilonproteobacteria
Example Microscopic Unique Characteristics
Genus Morphology
Campylobacter Gram-negative, Aerobic (microaerophilic); often infects chickens; may infect humans via
spiral-shaped undercooked meat, causing severe enteritis
rod
Helicobacter Gram-negative, Aerobic (microaerophilic) bacterium; can damage the inner lining of the
spiral-shaped stomach, causing chronic gastritis, peptic ulcers, and stomach cancer
rod
TABLE 4.6
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Name two Epsilonproteobacteria that cause gastrointestinal disorders.
12 S. Suerbaum, P. Michetti. “Helicobacter pylori infection.” New England Journal of Medicine 347 no. 15 (2002):1175–1186.
=== PDF PAGE 160 ===
146 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
4.3 Nonproteobacteria Gram-Negative Bacteria and Phototrophic Bacteria
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the unique features of nonproteobacteria gram-negative bacteria
• Give an example of a nonproteobacteria bacterium in each category
• Describe the unique features of phototrophic bacteria
• Identify phototrophic bacteria
The majority of the gram-negative bacteria belong to the phylum Proteobacteria, discussed in the previous section.
Those that do not are called the nonproteobacteria. In this section, we will describe four classes of gram-negative
nonproteobacteria: Chlamydia, the spirochetes, the CFB group, and the Planctomycetes. A diverse group of
phototrophic bacteria that includes Proteobacteria and nonproteobacteria will be discussed at the end of this
section.
Chlamydia
C. trachomatis is a human pathogen that causes trachoma, a disease of the eyes, often leading to blindness. C.
trachomatis also causes the sexually transmitted disease lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV). This disease is often
mildly symptomatic, manifesting as regional lymph node swelling, or it may be asymptomatic, but it is extremely
contagious and is common on college campuses.
Members of the genus Chlamydia are gram-negative, obligate intracellular pathogens that are extremely resistant to
the cellular defenses, giving them the ability to spread from host to host rapidly via elementary bodies. The
metabolically and reproductively inactive elementary bodies are the endospore-like form of intracellular bacteria
that enter an epithelial cell, where they become active. Figure 4.12 illustrates the life cycle of Chlamydia.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 161 ===
4.3 • Nonproteobacteria Gram-Negative Bacteria and Phototrophic Bacteria 147
FIGURE 4.12 Chlamydia begins infection of a host when the metabolically inactive elementary bodies enter an epithelial cell. Once inside
the host cell, the elementary bodies turn into active reticulate bodies. The reticulate bodies multiply and release more elementary bodies
when the cell dies after the Chlamydia uses all of the host cell’s ATP. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)
Spirochetes
Spirochetes are characterized by their long (up to 250 μm), spiral-shaped bodies. Most spirochetes are also very
thin, which makes it difficult to examine gram-stained preparations under a conventional brightfield microscope.
Darkfield fluorescent microscopy is typically used instead. Spirochetes are also difficult or even impossible to
culture. They are highly motile, using their axial filament to propel themselves. The axial filament is similar to a
flagellum, but it wraps around the cell and runs inside the cell body of a spirochete in the periplasmic space
between the outer membrane and the plasma membrane (Figure 4.13).
=== PDF PAGE 162 ===
148 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
FIGURE 4.13 Spirochetes are typically observed using darkfield microscopy (left). However, electron microscopy (top center, bottom
center) provides a more detailed view of their cellular morphology. The flagella found between the inner and outer membranes of
spirochetes wrap around the bacterium, causing a twisting motion used for locomotion. (credit “spirochetes” micrograph: modification of
work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit “SEM/TEM”: modification of work by Guyard C, Raffel SJ, Schrumpf ME,
Dahlstrom E, Sturdevant D, Ricklefs SM, Martens C, Hayes SF, Fischer ER, Hansen BT, Porcella SF, Schwan TG)
Several genera of spirochetes include human pathogens. For example, the genus Treponema includes a species T.
pallidum, which is further classified into four subspecies: T. pallidum pallidum, T. pallidum pertenue, T. pallidum
carateum, and T. pallidum endemicum. The subspecies T. pallidum pallidum causes the sexually transmitted
infection known as syphilis, the third most prevalent sexually transmitted bacterial infection in the United States,
after chlamydia and gonorrhea. The other subspecies of T. pallidum cause tropical infectious diseases of the skin,
bones, and joints.
Another genus of spirochete, Borrelia, contains a number of pathogenic species. B. burgdorferi causes Lyme
disease, which is transmitted by several genera of ticks (notably Ixodes and Amblyomma) and often produces a
“bull’s eye” rash, fever, fatigue, and, sometimes, debilitating arthritis. B. recurrens causes a condition known as
relapsing fever. Appendix D lists the genera, species, and related diseases for spirochetes.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Why do scientists typically use darkfield fluorescent microscopy to visualize spirochetes?
Cytophaga, Fusobacterium, and Bacteroides
The gram-negative nonproteobacteria of the genera Cytophaga, Fusobacterium, and Bacteroides are classified
together as a phylum and called the CFB group. Although they are phylogenetically diverse, bacteria of the CFB
group share some similarities in the sequence of nucleotides in their DNA. They are rod-shaped bacteria adapted to
anaerobic environments, such as the tissue of the gums, gut, and rumen of ruminating animals. CFB bacteria are
avid fermenters, able to process cellulose in rumen, thus enabling ruminant animals to obtain carbon and energy
from grazing.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 163 ===
4.3 • Nonproteobacteria Gram-Negative Bacteria and Phototrophic Bacteria 149
Cytophaga are motile aquatic bacteria that glide. Fusobacteria inhabit the human mouth and may cause severe
infectious diseases. The largest genus of the CFB group is Bacteroides, which includes dozens of species that are
prevalent inhabitants of the human large intestine, making up about 30% of the entire gut microbiome (Figure 4.14).
One gram of human feces contains up to 100 billion Bacteroides cells. Most Bacteroides are mutualistic. They
benefit from nutrients they find in the gut, and humans benefit from their ability to prevent pathogens from
colonizing the large intestine. Indeed, when populations of Bacteroides are reduced in the gut—as often occurs
when a patient takes antibiotics—the gut becomes a more favorable environment for pathogenic bacteria and fungi,
which can cause secondary infections.
FIGURE 4.14 Bacteroides comprise up to 30% of the normal microbiota in the human gut. (credit: NOAA)
Only a few species of Bacteroides are pathogenic. B. melaninogenicus, for example, can cause wound infections in
patients with weakened immune systems.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Why are Cytophaga, Fusobacterium, and Bacteroides classified together as the CFB group?
Planctomycetes
The Planctomycetes are found in aquatic environments, inhabiting freshwater, saltwater, and brackish water.
Planctomycetes are unusual in that they reproduce by budding, meaning that instead of one maternal cell splitting
into two equal daughter cells in the process of binary fission, the mother cell forms a bud that detaches from the
mother cell and lives as an independent cell. These so-called swarmer cells are motile and not attached to a
surface. However, they will soon differentiate into sessile (immobile) cells with an appendage called a holdfast that
allows them to attach to surfaces in the water (Figure 4.15). Only the sessile cells are able to reproduce.
FIGURE 4.15 (a) Sessile Planctomycetes have a holdfast that allows them to adhere to surfaces in aquatic environments. (b) Swarmers are
motile and lack a holdfast. (credit: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)
=== PDF PAGE 164 ===
150 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
Table 4.7 summarizes the characteristics of some of the most clinically relevant genera of nonproteobacteria.
Nonproteobacteria
Example Microscopic Morphology Unique Characteristics
Genus
Chlamydia Gram-negative, coccoid or ovoid Obligatory intracellular bacteria; some cause
bacterium chlamydia, trachoma, and pneumonia
Bacteroides Gram-negative bacillus Obligate anaerobic bacteria; abundant in the human
gastrointestinal tract; usually mutualistic, although
some species are opportunistic pathogens
Cytophaga Gram-negative bacillus Motile by gliding; live in soil or water; decompose
cellulose; may cause disease in fish
Fusobacterium Gram-negative bacillus with Anaerobic; form; biofilms; some species cause disease
pointed ends in humans (periodontitis, ulcers)
Leptospira Spiral-shaped bacterium Aerobic, abundant in shallow water reservoirs; infect
(spirochetes); gram negative-like rodents and domestic animals; can be transmitted to
(better viewed by darkfield humans by infected animals’ urine; may cause severe
microscopy); very thin disease
Borrelia Gram-negative-like spirochete; B. burgdorferi causes Lyme disease and B. recurrens
very thin; better viewed by causes relapsing fever
darkfield microscopy
Treponema Gram-negative-like spirochete; Motile; do not grow in culture; T. pallidum (subspecies T.
very thin; better viewed by pallidum pallidum) causes syphilis
darkfield microscopy
TABLE 4.7
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How do Planctomycetes reproduce?
Phototrophic Bacteria
The phototrophic bacteria are a large and diverse category of bacteria that do not represent a taxon but, rather, a
group of bacteria that use sunlight as their primary source of energy. This group contains both Proteobacteria and
nonproteobacteria. They use solar energy to synthesize ATP through photosynthesis. When they produce oxygen,
they perform oxygenic photosynthesis. When they do not produce oxygen, they perform anoxygenic photosynthesis.
With the exception of some cyanobacteria, the majority of phototrophic bacteria perform anoxygenic
photosynthesis.
One large group of phototrophic bacteria includes the purple or green bacteria that perform photosynthesis with the
help of bacteriochlorophylls, which are green, purple, or blue pigments similar to chlorophyll in plants. Some of
these bacteria have a varying amount of red or orange pigments called carotenoids. Their color varies from orange to
red to purple to green (Figure 4.16), and they are able to absorb light of various wavelengths. Traditionally, these
bacteria are classified into sulfur and nonsulfur bacteria; they are further differentiated by color.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 165 ===
4.3 • Nonproteobacteria Gram-Negative Bacteria and Phototrophic Bacteria 151
FIGURE 4.16 Purple and green sulfur bacteria use bacteriochlorophylls to perform photosynthesis.
The sulfur bacteria perform anoxygenic photosynthesis, using sulfites as electron donors and releasing free
elemental sulfur. Nonsulfur bacteria use organic substrates, such as succinate and malate, as donors of electrons.
The purple sulfur bacteria oxidize hydrogen sulfide into elemental sulfur and sulfuric acid and get their purple color
from the pigments bacteriochlorophylls and carotenoids. Bacteria of the genus Chromatium are purple sulfur
Gammaproteobacteria. These microorganisms are strict anaerobes and live in water. They use carbon dioxide as
their only source of carbon, but their survival and growth are possible only in the presence of sulfites, which they
use as electron donors. Chromatium has been used as a model for studies of bacterial photosynthesis since the
13
1950s.
The green sulfur bacteria use sulfide for oxidation and produce large amounts of green bacteriochlorophyll. The
genus Chlorobium is a green sulfur bacterium. These bacteria use at least four types of chlorophyll for
photosynthesis. The most prevalent of these, bacteriochlorophyll, is stored in special vesicle-like organelles called
chlorosomes.
Purple nonsulfur bacteria are similar to purple sulfur bacteria, except that they use hydrogen rather than hydrogen
sulfide for oxidation. Among the purple nonsulfur bacteria is the genus Rhodospirillum. These microorganisms are
facultative anaerobes, which are actually pink rather than purple, and can metabolize (“fix”) nitrogen. They may be
valuable in the field of biotechnology because of their potential ability to produce biological plastic and hydrogen
14
fuel.
The green nonsulfur bacteria are similar to green sulfur bacteria but they use substrates other than sulfides for
oxidation. Chloroflexus is an example of a green nonsulfur bacterium. It often has an orange color when it grows in
the dark, but it becomes green when it grows in sunlight. It stores bacteriochlorophyll in chlorosomes, similar to
Chlorobium, and performs anoxygenic photosynthesis, using organic sulfites (low concentrations) or molecular
hydrogen as electron donors, so it can survive in the dark if oxygen is available. Chloroflexus does not have flagella
but can glide, like Cytophaga. It grows at a wide range of temperatures, from 35 °C to 70 °C, thus can be
thermophilic.
Another large, diverse group of phototrophic bacteria compose the phylum Cyanobacteria; they get their blue-green
color from the chlorophyll contained in their cells (Figure 4.17). Species of this group perform oxygenic
photosynthesis, producing megatons of gaseous oxygen. Scientists hypothesize that cyanobacteria played a critical
role in the change of our planet’s anoxic atmosphere 1–2 billion years ago to the oxygen-rich environment we have
15
today.
13 R.C. Fuller et al. “Carbon Metabolism in Chromatium.” Journal of Biological Chemistry 236 (1961):2140–2149.
14 T.T. Selao et al. “Comparative Proteomic Studies in Rhodospirillum rubrum Grown Under Different Nitrogen Conditions.” Journal of
Proteome Research 7 no. 8 (2008):3267–3275.
15 A. De los Rios et al. “Ultrastructural and Genetic Characteristics of Endolithic Cyanobacterial Biofilms Colonizing Antarctic Granite
Rocks.” FEMS Microbiology Ecology 59 no. 2 (2007):386–395.
=== PDF PAGE 166 ===
152 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
FIGURE 4.17 (a) Microcystis aeruginosa is a type of cyanobacteria commonly found in freshwater environments. (b) In warm temperatures,
M. aeruginosa and other cyanobacteria can multiply rapidly and produce neurotoxins, resulting in blooms that are harmful to fish and other
aquatic animals. (credit a: modification of work by Dr. Barry H. Rosen/U.S. Geological Survey; credit b: modification of work by NOAA)
Cyanobacteria have other remarkable properties. Amazingly adaptable, they thrive in many habitats, including
marine and freshwater environments, soil, and even rocks. Roseli Ocampo-Friedmann and Imre Friedman identified
photosynthetic cyanobacteria living within rocks in Antarctica's Dry Valleys, a barren, snowless region with
extremely low precipitation and an average temperature of -15 degrees Celsius. The discovery was the basis for new
theories and practices in the area of astrobiology (both researchers went on to work for NASA), considering that
Earth's polar deserts have conditions resembling those on Mars, which may provide a home to organisms similar to
cyanobacteria. They can live as unicellular organisms or in colonies, and they can be filamentous, forming sheaths or
biofilms. Many of them fix nitrogen, converting molecular nitrogen into nitrites and nitrates that other bacteria,
plants, and animals can use. The reactions of nitrogen fixation occur in specialized cells called heterocysts.
Photosynthesis in Cyanobacteria is oxygenic, using the same type of chlorophyll a found in plants and algae as the
primary photosynthetic pigment. Cyanobacteria also use phycocyanin and cyanophycin, two secondary
photosynthetic pigments that give them their characteristic blue color. They are located in special organelles called
phycobilisomes and in folds of the cellular membrane called thylakoids, which are remarkably similar to the
photosynthetic apparatus of plants. Scientists hypothesize that plants originated from endosymbiosis of ancestral
16
eukaryotic cells and ancestral photosynthetic bacteria. Cyanobacteria are also an interesting object of research in
17 18 19
biochemistry, with studies investigating their potential as biosorbents and products of human nutrition.
Unfortunately, cyanobacteria can sometimes have a negative impact on human health. Genera such as Microcystis
can form harmful cyanobacterial blooms, forming dense mats on bodies of water and producing large quantities of
toxins that can harm wildlife and humans. These toxins have been implicated in tumors of the liver and diseases of
20
the nervous system in animals and humans.
Table 4.8 summarizes the characteristics of important phototrophic bacteria.
16 T. Cavalier-Smith. “Membrane Heredity and Early Chloroplast Evolution.” Trends in Plant Science 5 no. 4 (2000):174–182.
17 S. Zhang, D.A. Bryant. “The Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle in Cyanobacteria.” Science 334 no. 6062 (2011):1551–1553.
18 A. Cain et al. “Cyanobacteria as a Biosorbent for Mercuric Ion.” Bioresource Technology 99 no. 14 (2008):6578–6586.
19 C.S. Ku et al. “Edible Blue-Green Algae Reduce the Production of Pro-Inflammatory Cytokines by Inhibiting NF-κB Pathway in
Macrophages and Splenocytes.” Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1830 no. 4 (2013):2981–2988.
20 I. Stewart et al. Cyanobacterial Poisoning in Livestock, Wild Mammals and Birds – an Overview. Advances in Experimental Medicine and
Biology 619 (2008):613–637.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 167 ===
4.4 • Gram-Positive Bacteria 153
Phototrophic Bacteria
Phylum Class Example Genus Common Oxygenic or Sulfur
or Species Name Anoxygenic Deposition
Cyanobacteria Cyanophyceae Microcystis Blue-green Oxygenic None
aeruginosa bacteria
Chlorobi Chlorobia Chlorobium Green sulfur Anoxygenic Outside
bacteria the cell
Chloroflexi Chloroflexi Chloroflexus Green Anoxygenic None
(Division) nonsulfur
bacteria
Alphaproteobacteria Rhodospirillum Purple Anoxygenic None
nonsulfur
bacteria
Betaproteobacteria Rhodocyclus Purple Anoxygenic None
Proteobacteria
nonsulfur
bacteria
Gammaproteobacteria Chromatium Purple sulfur Anoxygenic Inside the
bacteria cell
TABLE 4.8
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What characteristic makes phototrophic bacteria different from other prokaryotes?
4.4 Gram-Positive Bacteria
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the unique features of each category of high G+C and low G+C gram-positive bacteria
• Identify similarities and differences between high G+C and low G+C bacterial groups
• Give an example of a bacterium of high G+C and low G+C group commonly associated with each category
Prokaryotes are identified as gram-positive if they have a multiple layer matrix of peptidoglycan forming the cell
wall. Crystal violet, the primary stain of the Gram stain procedure, is readily retained and stabilized within this
matrix, causing gram-positive prokaryotes to appear purple under a brightfield microscope after Gram staining. For
many years, the retention of Gram stain was one of the main criteria used to classify prokaryotes, even though some
prokaryotes did not readily stain with either the primary or secondary stains used in the Gram stain procedure.
Advances in nucleic acid biochemistry have revealed additional characteristics that can be used to classify gram-
positive prokaryotes, namely the guanine to cytosine ratios (G+C) in DNA and the composition of 16S rRNA subunits.
Microbiologists currently recognize two distinct groups of gram-positive, or weakly staining gram-positive,
prokaryotes. The class Actinobacteria comprises the high G+C gram-positive bacteria, which have more than 50%
guanine and cytosine nucleotides in their DNA. The class Bacilli comprises low G+C gram-positive bacteria, which
have less than 50% of guanine and cytosine nucleotides in their DNA.
=== PDF PAGE 168 ===
154 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
Actinobacteria: High G+C Gram-Positive Bacteria
The name Actinobacteria comes from the Greek words for rays and small rod, but Actinobacteria are very diverse.
Their microscopic appearance can range from thin filamentous branching rods to coccobacilli. Some Actinobacteria
are very large and complex, whereas others are among the smallest independently living organisms. Most
Actinobacteria live in the soil, but some are aquatic. The vast majority are aerobic. One distinctive feature of this
group is the presence of several different peptidoglycans in the cell wall.
The genus Actinomyces is a much studied representative of Actinobacteria. Actinomyces spp. play an important role
in soil ecology, and some species are human pathogens. A number of Actinomyces spp. inhabit the human mouth
and are opportunistic pathogens, causing infectious diseases like periodontitis (inflammation of the gums) and oral
abscesses. The species A. israelii is an anaerobe notorious for causing endocarditis (inflammation of the inner lining
of the heart) (Figure 4.18).
FIGURE 4.18 (a) Actinomyces israelii (false-color scanning electron micrograph [SEM]) has a branched structure. (b) Corynebacterium
diphtheria causes the deadly disease diphtheria. Note the distinctive palisades. (c) The gram-variable bacterium Gardnerella vaginalis
causes bacterial vaginosis. This micrograph shows a Pap smear from a person with vaginosis. (credit a: modification of work by
“GrahamColm”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit c: modification of
work by Mwakigonja AR, Torres LM, Mwakyoma HA, Kaaya EE)
The genus Mycobacterium is represented by bacilli covered with a mycolic acid coat. This waxy coat protects the
bacteria from some antibiotics, prevents them from drying out, and blocks penetration by Gram stain reagents (see
Staining Microscopic Specimens). Because of this, a special acid-fast staining procedure is used to visualize these
bacteria. The genus Mycobacterium is an important cause of a diverse group of infectious diseases. M. tuberculosis
is the causative agent of tuberculosis, a disease that primarily impacts the lungs but can infect other parts of the
body as well. It has been estimated that one-third of the world’s population has been infected with M. tuberculosis
and millions of new infections occur each year. Treatment of M. tuberculosis is challenging and requires patients to
take a combination of drugs for an extended time. Complicating treatment even further is the development and
spread of multidrug-resistant strains of this pathogen.
Another pathogenic species, M. leprae, is the cause of Hansen’s disease (leprosy), a chronic disease that impacts
peripheral nerves and the integrity of the skin and mucosal surface of the respiratory tract. Loss of pain sensation
and the presence of skin lesions increase susceptibility to secondary injuries and infections with other pathogens.
Bacteria in the genus Corynebacterium contain diaminopimelic acid in their cell walls, and microscopically often
form palisades, or pairs of rod-shaped cells resembling the letter V. Cells may contain metachromatic granules,
intracellular storage of inorganic phosphates that are useful for identification of Corynebacterium. The vast majority
of Corynebacterium spp. are nonpathogenic; however, C. diphtheria is the causative agent of diphtheria, a disease
that can be fatal, especially in children (Figure 4.18). C. diphtheria produces a toxin that forms a pseudomembrane
in the patient’s throat, causing swelling, difficulty breathing, and other symptoms that can become serious if
untreated.
The genus Bifidobacterium consists of filamentous anaerobes, many of which are commonly found in the
gastrointestinal tract, vagina, and mouth. In fact, Bifidobacterium spp. constitute a substantial part of the human gut
microbiota and are frequently used as probiotics and in yogurt production.
The genus Gardnerella, contains only one species, G. vaginalis. This species is defined as “gram-variable” because
its small coccobacilli do not show consistent results when Gram stained (Figure 4.18). Based on its genome, it is
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 169 ===
4.4 • Gram-Positive Bacteria 155
placed into the high G+C gram-positive group. G. vaginalis can cause bacterial vaginosis; symptoms are typically
mild or even undetectable, but can lead to complications during pregnancy.
Table 4.9 summarizes the characteristics of some important genera of Actinobacteria. Additional information on
Actinobacteria appears in Appendix D.
Actinobacteria: High G+C Gram-Positive
Example Genus Microscopic Unique Characteristics
Morphology
Actinomyces Gram-positive Facultative anaerobes; in soil, decompose organic matter; in the
bacillus; in colonies, human mouth, may cause gum disease
shows fungus-like
threads (hyphae)
Arthrobacter Gram-positive bacillus Obligate aerobes; divide by “snapping,” forming V-like pairs of
(at the exponential daughter cells; degrade phenol, can be used in bioremediation
stage of growth) or
coccus (in stationary
phase)
Bifidobacterium Gram-positive, Anaerobes commonly found in human gut microbiota
filamentous
actinobacterium
Corynebacterium Gram-positive bacillus Aerobes or facultative anaerobes; form palisades; grow slowly;
require enriched media in culture; C. diphtheriae causes
diphtheria
Frankia Gram-positive, Nitrogen-fixing bacteria; live in symbiosis with legumes
fungus-like
(filamentous) bacillus
Gardnerella Gram-variable Colonize the human vagina, may alter the microbial ecology, thus
coccobacillus leading to vaginosis
Micrococcus Gram-positive coccus, Ubiquitous in the environment and on the human skin; oxidase-
form microscopic positive (as opposed to morphologically similar S. aureus); some
clusters are opportunistic pathogens
Mycobacterium Gram-positive, acid- Slow growing, aerobic, resistant to drying and phagocytosis;
fast bacillus covered with a waxy coat made of mycolic acid; M. tuberculosis
causes tuberculosis; M. leprae causes leprosy
Nocardia Weakly gram-positive May colonize the human gingiva; may cause severe pneumonia
bacillus; forms acid- and inflammation of the skin
fast branches
Cutibacterium Gram-positive bacillus Aerotolerant anaerobe; slow-growing; C. acnes reproduces in the
human sebaceous glands and may cause or contribute to acne
TABLE 4.9
=== PDF PAGE 170 ===
156 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
Actinobacteria: High G+C Gram-Positive
Example Genus Microscopic Unique Characteristics
Morphology
Rhodococcus Gram-positive bacillus Strict aerobe; used in industry for biodegradation of pollutants; R.
fascians is a plant pathogen, and R. equi causes pneumonia in
foals
Streptomyces Gram-positive, Very diverse genus (>500 species); aerobic, spore-forming
fungus-like bacteria; scavengers, decomposers found in soil (give the soil its
(filamentous) bacillus “earthy” odor); used in pharmaceutical industry as antibiotic
producers (more than two-thirds of clinically useful antibiotics)
TABLE 4.9
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What is one distinctive feature of Actinobacteria?
Low G+C Gram-positive Bacteria
The low G+C gram-positive bacteria have less than 50% guanine and cytosine in their DNA, and this group of
bacteria includes a number of genera of bacteria that are pathogenic.
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 3
Based on her symptoms, Marsha’s doctor suspected that she had a case of tuberculosis. Although less common
in the United States, tuberculosis is still extremely common in many parts of the world, including Nigeria.
Marsha’s work there in a medical lab likely exposed her to Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the bacterium that
causes tuberculosis.
Marsha’s doctor ordered her to stay at home, wear a respiratory mask, and confine herself to one room as much
as possible. He also said that Marsha had to take one semester off school. He prescribed isoniazid and rifampin,
antibiotics used in a drug cocktail to treat tuberculosis, which Marsha was to take three times a day for at least
three months.
• Why did the doctor order Marsha to stay home for three months?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
Clostridia
One large and diverse class of low G+C gram-positive bacteria is Clostridia. The best studied genus of this class is
Clostridium. These rod-shaped bacteria are generally obligate anaerobes that produce endospores and can be
found in anaerobic habitats like soil and aquatic sediments rich in organic nutrients. The endospores may survive for
many years.
Clostridium spp. produce more kinds of protein toxins than any other bacterial genus, and several species are
human pathogens. C. perfringens is the third most common cause of food poisoning in the United States and is the
causative agent of an even more serious disease called gas gangrene. Gas gangrene occurs when C. perfringens
endospores enter a wound and germinate, becoming viable bacterial cells and producing a toxin that can cause the
necrosis (death) of tissue. C. tetani, which causes tetanus, produces a neurotoxin that is able to enter neurons,
travel to regions of the central nervous system where it blocks the inhibition of nerve impulses involved in muscle
contractions, and cause a life-threatening spastic paralysis. C. botulinum produces botulinum neurotoxin, the most
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 171 ===
4.4 • Gram-Positive Bacteria 157
lethal biological toxin known. Botulinum toxin is responsible for rare but frequently fatal cases of botulism. The toxin
blocks the release of acetylcholine in neuromuscular junctions, causing flaccid paralysis. In very small
concentrations, botulinum toxin has been used to treat muscle pathologies in humans and in a cosmetic procedure
to eliminate wrinkles. Clostridioides difficile is a common source of hospital-acquired infections (Figure 4.19) that
can result in serious and even fatal cases of colitis (inflammation of the large intestine). Infections often occur in
patients who are immunosuppressed or undergoing antibiotic therapy that alters the normal microbiota of the
gastrointestinal tract. Appendix D lists the genera, species, and related diseases for Clostridia.
FIGURE 4.19 Clostridioides difficile, a gram-positive, rod-shaped bacterium, causes severe colitis and diarrhea, often after the normal gut
microbiota is eradicated by antibiotics. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Lactobacillales
The order Lactobacillales comprises low G+C gram-positive bacteria that include both bacilli and cocci in the genera
Lactobacillus, Leuconostoc, Enterococcus, and Streptococcus. Bacteria of the latter three genera typically are
spherical or ovoid and often form chains.
Streptococcus, the name of which comes from the Greek word for twisted chain, is responsible for many types of
infectious diseases in humans. Species from this genus, often referred to as streptococci, are usually classified by
serotypes called Lancefield groups, and by their ability to lyse red blood cells when grown on blood agar.
S. pyogenes belongs to the Lancefield group A, β-hemolytic Streptococcus. This species is considered a pyogenic
pathogen because of the associated pus production observed with infections it causes (Figure 4.20). S. pyogenes is
the most common cause of bacterial pharyngitis (strep throat); it is also an important cause of various skin
infections that can be relatively mild (e.g., impetigo) or life threatening (e.g., necrotizing fasciitis, also known as flesh
eating disease), life threatening.
FIGURE 4.20 (a) A gram-stained specimen of Streptococcus pyogenes shows the chains of cocci characteristic of this organism’s
morphology. (b) S. pyogenes on blood agar shows characteristic lysis of red blood cells, indicated by the halo of clearing around colonies.
(credit a, b: modification of work by American Society for Microbiology)
The nonpyogenic (i.e., not associated with pus production) streptococci are a group of streptococcal species that are
not a taxon but are grouped together because they inhabit the human mouth. The nonpyogenic streptococci do not
belong to any of the Lancefield groups. Most are commensals, but a few, such as S. mutans, are implicated in the
development of dental caries.
=== PDF PAGE 172 ===
158 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
S. pneumoniae (commonly referred to as pneumococcus), is a Streptococcus species that also does not belong to
any Lancefield group. S. pneumoniae cells appear microscopically as diplococci, pairs of cells, rather than the long
chains typical of most streptococci. Scientists have known since the 19th century that S. pneumoniae causes
pneumonia and other respiratory infections. However, this bacterium can also cause a wide range of other diseases,
including meningitis, septicemia, osteomyelitis, and endocarditis, especially in newborns, the elderly, and patients
with immunodeficiency.
Bacilli
The name of the class Bacilli suggests that it is made up of bacteria that are bacillus in shape, but it is a
morphologically diverse class that includes bacillus-shaped and cocccus-shaped genera. Among the many genera in
this class are two that are very important clinically: Bacillus and Staphylococcus.
Bacteria in the genus Bacillus are bacillus in shape and can produce endospores. They include aerobes or facultative
anaerobes. A number of Bacillus spp. are used in various industries, including the production of antibiotics (e.g.,
barnase), enzymes (e.g., alpha-amylase, BamH1 restriction endonuclease), and detergents (e.g., subtilisin).
Two notable pathogens belong to the genus Bacillus. B. anthracis is the pathogen that causes anthrax, a severe
disease that affects wild and domesticated animals and can spread from infected animals to humans. Anthrax
manifests in humans as charcoal-black ulcers on the skin, severe enterocolitis, pneumonia, and brain damage due
to swelling. If untreated, anthrax is lethal. B. cereus, a closely related species, is a pathogen that may cause food
poisoning. It is a rod-shaped species that forms chains. Colonies appear milky white with irregular shapes when
cultured on blood agar (Figure 4.21). One other important species is B. thuringiensis. This bacterium produces a
number of substances used as insecticides because they are toxic for insects.
FIGURE 4.21 (a) In this gram-stained specimen, the violet rod-shaped cells forming chains are the gram-positive bacteria Bacillus cereus.
The small, pink cells are the gram-negative bacteria Escherichia coli. (b) In this culture, white colonies of B. cereus have been grown on
sheep blood agar. (credit a: modification of work by “Bibliomaniac 15”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention)
The genus Staphylococcus also belongs to the class Bacilli, even though its shape is coccus rather than a bacillus.
The name Staphylococcus comes from a Greek word for bunches of grapes, which describes their microscopic
appearance in culture (Figure 4.22). Staphylococcus spp. are facultative anaerobic, halophilic, and nonmotile. The
two best-studied species of this genus are S. epidermidis and S. aureus.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 173 ===
4.4 • Gram-Positive Bacteria 159
FIGURE 4.22 This SEM of Staphylococcus aureus illustrates the typical “grape-like” clustering of cells. (credit: modification of work by
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
S. epidermidis, whose main habitat is the human skin, is thought to be nonpathogenic for humans with healthy
immune systems, but in patients with immunodeficiency, it may cause infections in skin wounds and prostheses
(e.g., artificial joints, heart valves). S. epidermidis is also an important cause of infections associated with
intravenous catheters. This makes it a dangerous pathogen in hospital settings, where many patients may be
immunocompromised.
Strains of S. aureus cause a wide variety of infections in humans, including skin infections that produce boils,
carbuncles, cellulitis, or impetigo. Certain strains of S. aureus produce a substance called enterotoxin, which can
cause severe enteritis, often called staph food poisoning. Some strains of S. aureus produce the toxin responsible
for toxic shock syndrome, which can result in cardiovascular collapse and death.
Many strains of S. aureus have developed resistance to antibiotics. Some antibiotic-resistant strains are designated
as methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant S. aureus (VRSA). These strains are some of the
most difficult to treat because they exhibit resistance to nearly all available antibiotics, not just methicillin and
vancomycin. Because they are difficult to treat with antibiotics, infections can be lethal. MRSA and VRSA are also
contagious, posing a serious threat in hospitals, nursing homes, dialysis facilities, and other places where there are
large populations of elderly, bedridden, and/or immunocompromised patients. Appendix D lists the genera, species,
and related diseases for bacilli.
Mycoplasmas
Although Mycoplasma spp. do not possess a cell wall and, therefore, are not stained by Gram-stain reagents, this
genus is still included with the low G+C gram-positive bacteria. The genus Mycoplasma includes more than 100
species, which share several unique characteristics. They are very small cells, some with a diameter of about 0.2
μm, which is smaller than some large viruses. They have no cell walls and, therefore, are pleomorphic, meaning that
they may take on a variety of shapes and can even resemble very small animal cells. Because they lack a
characteristic shape, they can be difficult to identify. One species, M. pneumoniae, causes the mild form of
pneumonia known as “walking pneumonia” or “atypical pneumonia.” This form of pneumonia is typically less severe
than forms caused by other bacteria or viruses.
Table 4.10 summarizes the characteristics of notable genera low G+C Gram-positive bacteria.
=== PDF PAGE 174 ===
160 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
Bacilli: Low G+C Gram-Positive Bacteria
Example Microscopic Morphology Unique Characteristics
Genus
Bacillus Large, gram-positive bacillus Aerobes or facultative anaerobes; form endospores; B.
anthracis causes anthrax in cattle and humans, B. cereus
may cause food poisoning
Clostridium Gram-positive bacillus Strict anaerobes; form endospores; all known species are
pathogenic, causing tetanus, gas gangrene, and botulism
Enterococcus Gram-positive coccus; forms Anaerobic aerotolerant bacteria, abundant in the human
microscopic pairs in culture gut, may cause urinary tract and other infections in the
(resembling Streptococcus nosocomial environment
pneumoniae)
Lactobacillus Gram-positive bacillus Facultative anaerobes; ferment sugars into lactic acid; part
of the vaginal microbiota; used as probiotics
Leuconostoc Gram-positive coccus; may Fermenter, used in food industry to produce sauerkraut and
form microscopic chains in kefir
culture
Mycoplasma The smallest bacteria; appear Have no cell wall; classified as low G+C Gram-positive
pleomorphic under electron bacteria because of their genome; M. pneumoniae causes
microscope “walking” pneumonia
Staphylococcus Gram-positive coccus; forms Tolerate high salt concentration; facultative anaerobes;
microscopic clusters in produce catalase; S. aureus can also produce coagulase and
culture that resemble toxins responsible for local (skin) and generalized infections
bunches of grapes
Streptococcus Gram-positive coccus; forms Diverse genus; classified into groups based on sharing
chains or pairs in culture certain antigens; some species cause hemolysis and may
produce toxins responsible for human local (throat) and
generalized disease
Ureaplasma Similar to Mycoplasma Part of the human vaginal and lower urinary tract
microbiota; may cause inflammation, sometimes leading to
internal scarring and infertility
TABLE 4.10
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Name some ways in which streptococci are classified.
• Name one pathogenic low G+C gram-positive bacterium and a disease it causes.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 175 ===
4.4 • Gram-Positive Bacteria 161
CLINICAL FOCUS
Resolution
Marsha’s sputum sample was sent to the microbiology lab to confirm the identity of the microorganism causing
her infection. The lab also performed antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) on the sample to confirm that the
physician has prescribed the correct antimicrobial drugs.
Direct microscopic examination of the sputum revealed acid-fast bacteria (AFB) present in Marsha’s sputum.
When placed in culture, there were no signs of growth for the first 8 days, suggesting that microorganism was
either dead or growing very slowly. Slow growth is a distinctive characteristic of M. tuberculosis.
After four weeks, the lab microbiologist observed distinctive colorless granulated colonies (Figure 4.23). The
colonies contained AFB showing the same microscopic characteristics as those revealed during the direct
microscopic examination of Marsha’s sputum. To confirm the identification of the AFB, samples of the colonies
were analyzed using nucleic acid hybridization, or direct nucleic acid amplification (NAA) testing. When a
bacterium is acid-fast, it is classified in the family Mycobacteriaceae. DNA sequencing of variable genomic
regions of the DNA extracted from these bacteria revealed that it was high G+C. This fact served to finalize
Marsha’s diagnosis as infection with M. tuberculosis. After nine months of treatment with the drugs prescribed
by her doctor, Marsha made a full recovery.
FIGURE 4.23 M. tuberculosis grows on Löwenstein-Jensen (LJ) agar in distinct colonies. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention)
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
EYE ON ETHICS
Biopiracy and Bioprospecting
In 1969, an employee of a Swiss pharmaceutical company was vacationing in Norway and decided to collect
some soil samples. He took them back to his lab, and the Swiss company subsequently used the fungus
Tolypocladium inflatum in those samples to develop cyclosporine A, a drug widely used in patients who undergo
tissue or organ transplantation. The Swiss company earns more than $1 billion a year for production of
cyclosporine A, yet Norway receives nothing in return—no payment to the government or benefit for the
Norwegian people. Despite the fact the cyclosporine A saves numerous lives, many consider the means by which
the soil samples were obtained to be an act of “biopiracy,” essentially a form of theft. Do the ends justify the
means in a case like this?
=== PDF PAGE 176 ===
162 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
Nature is full of as-yet-undiscovered bacteria and other microorganisms that could one day be used to develop
21
new life-saving drugs or treatments. Pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies stand to reap huge profits
from such discoveries, but ethical questions remain. To whom do biological resources belong? Should
companies who invest (and risk) millions of dollars in research and development be required to share revenue or
royalties for the right to access biological resources?
Compensation is not the only issue when it comes to bioprospecting. Some communities and cultures are
philosophically opposed to bioprospecting, fearing unforeseen consequences of collecting genetic or biological
material. Native Hawaiians, for example, are very protective of their unique biological resources.
For many years, it was unclear what rights government agencies, private corporations, and citizens had when it
came to collecting samples of microorganisms from public land. Then, in 1993, the Convention on Biological
Diversity granted each nation the rights to any genetic and biological material found on their own land. Scientists
can no longer collect samples without a prior arrangement with the land owner for compensation. This
convention now ensures that companies act ethically in obtaining the samples they use to create their products.
4.5 Deeply Branching Bacteria
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the unique features of deeply branching bacteria
• Give examples of significant deeply branching bacteria
On a phylogenetic tree (see A Systematic Approach), the trunk or root of the tree represents a common ancient
evolutionary ancestor, often called the last universal common ancestor (LUCA), and the branches are its
evolutionary descendants. Scientists consider the deeply branching bacteria, such as the genus Acetothermus, to
be the first of these non-LUCA forms of life produced by evolution some 3.5 billion years ago. When placed on the
phylogenetic tree, they stem from the common root of life, deep and close to the LUCA root—hence the name
“deeply branching” (Figure 4.24).
FIGURE 4.24 The star on this phylogenetic tree of life shows the position of the deeply branching bacteria Acetothermus. (credit:
modification of work by Eric Gaba)
21 J. Andre. Bioethics as Practice. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2002.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 177 ===
4.5 • Deeply Branching Bacteria 163
The deeply branching bacteria may provide clues regarding the structure and function of ancient and now extinct
forms of life. We can hypothesize that ancient bacteria, like the deeply branching bacteria that still exist, were
thermophiles or hyperthermophiles, meaning that they thrived at very high temperatures. Acetothermus
paucivorans, a gram-negative anaerobic bacterium discovered in 1988 in sewage sludge, is a thermophile growing
22
at an optimal temperature of 58 °C. Scientists have determined it to be the deepest branching bacterium, or the
closest evolutionary relative of the LUCA (Figure 4.24).
The class Aquificae includes deeply branching bacteria that are adapted to the harshest conditions on our planet,
resembling the conditions thought to dominate the earth when life first appeared. Bacteria from the genus Aquifex
are hyperthermophiles, living in hot springs at a temperature higher than 90 °C. The species A. pyrophilus thrives
near underwater volcanoes and thermal ocean vents, where the temperature of water (under high pressure) can
reach 138 °C. Aquifex bacteria use inorganic substances as nutrients. For example, A. pyrophilus can reduce
oxygen, and it is able to reduce nitrogen in anaerobic conditions. They also show a remarkable resistance to
ultraviolet light and ionizing radiation. Taken together, these observations support the hypothesis that the ancient
ancestors of deeply branching bacteria began evolving more than 3 billion years ago, when the earth was hot and
lacked an atmosphere, exposing the bacteria to nonionizing and ionizing radiation.
The class Thermotogae is represented mostly by hyperthermophilic, as well as some mesophilic (preferring
moderate temperatures), anaerobic gram-negative bacteria whose cells are wrapped in a peculiar sheath-like outer
membrane called a toga. The thin layer of peptidoglycan in their cell wall has an unusual structure; it contains
diaminopimelic acid and D-lysine. These bacteria are able to use a variety of organic substrates and produce
molecular hydrogen, which can be used in industry. The class contains several genera, of which the best known is
the genus Thermotoga. One species of this genus, T. maritima, lives near the thermal ocean vents and thrives in
temperatures of 90 °C; another species, T. subterranea, lives in underground oil reservoirs.
Finally, the deeply branching bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans belongs to a genus whose name is derived from a
Greek word meaning terrible berry. Nicknamed “Conan the Bacterium,” D. radiodurans is considered a
polyextremophile because of its ability to survive under the many different kinds of extreme conditions—extreme
heat, drought, vacuum, acidity, and radiation. It owes its name to its ability to withstand doses of ionizing radiation
that kill all other known bacteria; this special ability is attributed to some unique mechanisms of DNA repair.
FIGURE 4.25 Deinococcus radiodurans, or “Conan the Bacterium,” survives in the harshest conditions on earth.
22 G. Dietrich et al. “Acetothermus paucivorans, gen. nov., sp. Nov., a Strictly Anaerobic, Thermophilic Bacterium From Sewage Sludge,
Fermenting Hexoses to Acetate, CO2, and H2.” Systematic and Applied Microbiology 10 no. 2 (1988):174–179.
=== PDF PAGE 178 ===
164 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
4.6 Archaea
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the unique features of each category of Archaea
• Explain why archaea might not be associated with human microbiomes or pathology
• Give common examples of archaea commonly associated with unique environmental habitats
Like organisms in the domain Bacteria, organisms of the domain Archaea are all unicellular organisms. However,
archaea differ structurally from bacteria in several significant ways, as discussed in Unique Characteristics of
Prokaryotic Cells. To summarize:
• The archaeal cell membrane is composed of ether linkages with branched isoprene chains (as opposed to the
bacterial cell membrane, which has ester linkages with unbranched fatty acids).
• Archaeal cell walls lack peptidoglycan, but some contain a structurally similar substance called
pseudopeptidoglycan or pseudomurein.
• The genomes of Archaea are larger and more complex than those of bacteria.
Domain Archaea is as diverse as domain Bacteria, and its representatives can be found in any habitat. Some archaea
are mesophiles, and many are extremophiles, preferring extreme hot or cold, extreme salinity, or other conditions
that are hostile to most other forms of life on earth. Their metabolism is adapted to the harsh environments, and
they can perform methanogenesis, for example, which bacteria and eukaryotes cannot.
The size and complexity of the archaeal genome makes it difficult to classify. Most taxonomists agree that within the
Archaea, there are currently five major phyla: Crenarchaeota, Euryarchaeota, Korarchaeota, Nanoarchaeota, and
Thaumarchaeota. There are likely many other archaeal groups that have not yet been systematically studied and
classified.
With few exceptions, archaea are not present in the human microbiota, and none are currently known to be
associated with infectious diseases in humans, animals, plants, or microorganisms. However, many play important
roles in the environment and may thus have an indirect impact on human health.
Crenarchaeota
Crenarchaeota is a class of Archaea that is extremely diverse, containing genera and species that differ vastly in
their morphology and requirements for growth. All Crenarchaeota are aquatic organisms, and they are thought to be
the most abundant microorganisms in the oceans. Most, but not all, Crenarchaeota are hyperthermophiles; some of
23
them (notably, the genus Pyrolobus) are able to grow at temperatures up to 113 °C.
Archaea of the genus Sulfolobus (Figure 4.26) are thermophiles that prefer temperatures around 70–80°C and
24
acidophiles that prefer a pH of 2–3. Sulfolobus can live in aerobic or anaerobic environments. In the presence of
oxygen, Sulfolobus spp. use metabolic processes similar to those of heterotrophs. In anaerobic environments, they
oxidize sulfur to produce sulfuric acid, which is stored in granules. Sulfolobus spp. are used in biotechnology for the
25
production of thermostable and acid-resistant proteins called affitins. Affitins can bind and neutralize various
antigens (molecules found in toxins or infectious agents that provoke an immune response from the body).
23 E. Blochl et al.“Pyrolobus fumani, gen. and sp. nov., represents a novel group of Archaea, extending the upper temperature limit for life
to 113°C.” Extremophiles 1 (1997):14–21.
24 T.D. Brock et al. “Sulfolobus: A New Genus of Sulfur-Oxidizing Bacteria Living at Low pH and High Temperature.” Archiv für
Mikrobiologie 84 no. 1 (1972):54–68.
25 S. Pacheco et al. “Affinity Transfer to the Archaeal Extremophilic Sac7d Protein by Insertion of a CDR.” Protein Engineering Design and
Selection 27 no. 10 (2014):431-438.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 179 ===
4.6 • Archaea 165
FIGURE 4.26 Sulfolobus, an archaeon of the class Crenarchaeota, oxidizes sulfur and stores sulfuric acid in its granules.
Another genus, Thermoproteus, is represented by strictly anaerobic organisms with an optimal growth temperature
of 85 °C. They have flagella and, therefore, are motile. Thermoproteus has a cellular membrane in which lipids form
a monolayer rather than a bilayer, which is typical for archaea. Its metabolism is autotrophic. To synthesize ATP,
Thermoproteus spp. reduce sulfur or molecular hydrogen and use carbon dioxide or carbon monoxide as a source of
carbon. Thermoproteus is thought to be the deepest-branching genus of Archaea, and thus is a living example of
some of our planet’s earliest forms of life.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What types of environments do Crenarchaeota prefer?
Euryarchaeota
The phylum Euryarchaeota includes several distinct classes. Species in the classes Methanobacteria, Methanococci,
and Methanomicrobia represent Archaea that can be generally described as methanogens. Methanogens are unique
in that they can reduce carbon dioxide in the presence of hydrogen, producing methane. They can live in the most
extreme environments and can reproduce at temperatures varying from below freezing to boiling. Methanogens
have been found in hot springs as well as deep under ice in Greenland. Methanogens also produce gases in
ruminants and humans. Some scientists have even hypothesized that methanogens may inhabit the planet Mars
26
because the mixture of gases produced by methanogens resembles the makeup of the Martian atmosphere.
The class Halobacteria (which was named before scientists recognized the distinction between Archaea and
Bacteria) includes halophilic (“salt-loving”) archaea. Halobacteria require a very high concentrations of sodium
chloride in their aquatic environment. The required concentration is close to saturation, at 36%; such environments
include the Dead Sea as well as some salty lakes in Antarctica and south-central Asia. One remarkable feature of
these organisms is that they perform photosynthesis using the protein bacteriorhodopsin, which gives them, and the
bodies of water they inhabit, a beautiful purple color (Figure 4.27).
26 R.R. Britt “Crater Critters: Where Mars Microbes Might Lurk.” http://www.space.com/1880-crater-critters-mars-microbes-lurk.html.
Accessed April 7, 2015.
=== PDF PAGE 180 ===
166 4 • Prokaryotic Diversity
FIGURE 4.27 Halobacteria growing in these salt ponds gives them a distinct purple color. (credit: modification of work by Tony Hisgett)
Notable species of Halobacteria include Halobacterium salinarum, which may be the oldest living organism on
27
earth; scientists have isolated its DNA from fossils that are 250 million years old. Another species, Haloferax
volcanii, shows a very sophisticated system of ion exchange, which enables it to balance the concentration of salts
at high temperatures.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Where do Halobacteria live?
MICRO CONNECTIONS
Finding a Link Between Archaea and Disease
Archaea are not known to cause any disease in humans, animals, plants, bacteria, or in other archaea. Although this
makes sense for the extremophiles, not all archaea live in extreme environments. Many genera and species of
Archaea are mesophiles, so they can live in human and animal microbiomes, although they rarely do. As we have
learned, some methanogens exist in the human gastrointestinal tract. Yet we have no reliable evidence pointing to
any archaean as the causative agent of any human disease.
Still, scientists have attempted to find links between human disease and archaea. For example, in 2004, Lepp et al.
presented evidence that an archaean called Methanobrevibacter oralis inhabits the gums of patients with
28
periodontal disease. The authors suggested that the activity of these methanogens causes the disease. However,
it was subsequently shown that there was no causal relationship between M. oralis and periodontitis. It seems more
likely that periodontal disease causes an enlargement of anaerobic regions in the mouth that are subsequently
29
populated by M. oralis.
There remains no good answer as to why archaea do not seem to be pathogenic, but scientists continue to
speculate and hope to find the answer.
27 H. Vreeland et al. “Fatty acid and DA Analyses of Permian Bacterium Isolated From Ancient Salt Crystals Reveal Differences With Their
Modern Relatives.” Extremophiles 10 (2006):71–78.
28 P.W. Lepp et al. “Methanogenic Archaea and Human Gum Disease.” Proceedings of the National Academies of Science of the United
States of America 101 no. 16 (2004):6176–6181.
29 R.I. Aminov. “Role of Archaea in Human Disease.” Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 3 (2013):42.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 181 ===
4 • Summary 167
Summary
4.1 Prokaryote Habitats, Relationships, and Gammaproteobacteria, is perhaps the most
Microbiomes studied bacterium.
• Deltaproteobacteria make up a small group able
• Prokaryotes are unicellular microorganisms
to reduce sulfate or elemental sulfur. Some are
whose cells have no nucleus.
scavengers and form myxospores, with
• Prokaryotes can be found everywhere on our
multicellular fruiting bodies.
planet, even in the most extreme environments.
• Epsilonproteobacteria make up the smallest
• Prokaryotes are very flexible metabolically, so
group of Proteobacteria. The genera
they are able to adjust their feeding to the
Campylobacter and Helicobacter are human
available natural resources.
pathogens.
• Prokaryotes live in communities that interact
among themselves and with large organisms that 4.3 Nonproteobacteria Gram-Negative
they use as hosts (including humans). Bacteria and Phototrophic Bacteria
• The totality of forms of prokaryotes (particularly
• Gram-negative nonproteobacteria include the
bacteria) living on the human body is called the
taxa spirochetes; the Chlamydia, Cytophaga,
human microbiome, which varies between
Fusobacterium, Bacteroides group;
regions of the body and individuals, and changes
Planctomycetes; and many representatives of
over time.
phototrophic bacteria.
• The totality of forms of prokaryotes (particularly
• Spirochetes are motile, spiral bacteria with a
bacteria) living in a certain region of the human
long, narrow body; they are difficult or
body (e.g., mouth, throat, gut, eye, vagina) is
impossible to culture.
called the microbiota of this region.
• Several genera of spirochetes contain human
• Prokaryotes are classified into domains Archaea
pathogens that cause such diseases as syphilis
and Bacteria.
and Lyme disease.
• In recent years, the traditional approaches to
• Cytophaga, Fusobacterium, and Bacteroides are
classification of prokaryotes have been
classified together as a phylum called the CFB
supplemented by approaches based on
group. They are rod-shaped anaerobic
molecular genetics.
organoheterotrophs and avid fermenters.
4.2 Proteobacteria Cytophaga are aquatic bacteria with the gliding
motility. Fusobacteria inhabit the human mouth
• Proteobacteria is a phylum of gram-negative
and may cause severe infectious diseases.
bacteria discovered by Carl Woese in the 1980s
Bacteroides are present in vast numbers in the
based on nucleotide sequence homology.
human gut, most of them being mutualistic but
• Proteobacteria are further classified into the
some are pathogenic.
classes alpha-, beta-, gamma-, delta- and
• Planctomycetes are aquatic bacteria that
epsilonproteobacteria, each class having
reproduce by budding; they may form large
separate orders, families, genera, and species.
colonies, and develop a holdfast.
• Alphaproteobacteria include several obligate
• Phototrophic bacteria are not a taxon but, rather,
and facultative intracellular pathogens, including
a group categorized by their ability to use the
the rickettsias. Some Alphaproteobacteria can
energy of sunlight. They include Proteobacteria
convert atmospheric nitrogen to nitrites, making
and nonproteobacteria, as well as sulfur and
nitrogen usable for other forms of life.
nonsulfur bacteria colored purple or green.
• Betaproteobacteria are a diverse group of
• Sulfur bacteria perform anoxygenic
bacteria that include human pathogens of the
photosynthesis, using sulfur compounds as
genus Neisseria and the species Bordetella
donors of electrons, whereas nonsulfur bacteria
pertussis.
use organic compounds (succinate, malate) as
• Gammaproteobacteria are the largest and the
donors of electrons.
most diverse group of Proteobacteria. Many are
• Some phototrophic bacteria are able to fix
human pathogens that are aerobes or facultative
nitrogen, providing the usable forms of nitrogen
anaerobes. Some Gammaproteobacteria are
to other organisms.
enteric bacteria that may be coliform or
• Cyanobacteria are oxygen-producing bacteria
noncoliform. Escherichia coli, a member of
thought to have played a critical role in the
=== PDF PAGE 182 ===
168 4 • Review Questions
forming of the earth’s atmosphere. Bacillus and Staphylococcus. B. anthracis causes
anthrax, B. cereus may cause opportunistic
4.4 Gram-Positive Bacteria
infections of the gastrointestinal tract, and S.
• Gram-positive bacteria are a very large and aureus strains can cause a wide range of
diverse group of microorganisms. Understanding infections and diseases, many of which are highly
their taxonomy and knowing their unique resistant to antibiotics.
features is important for diagnostics and • Mycoplasma spp. are very small, pleomorphic
treatment of infectious diseases. low G+C gram-positive bacteria that lack cell
• Gram-positive bacteria are classified into high walls. M. pneumoniae causes atypical
G+C gram-positive and low G+C gram-positive pneumonia.
bacteria, based on the prevalence of guanine and
4.5 Deeply Branching Bacteria
cytosine nucleotides in their genome
• Actinobacteria is the taxonomic name of the • Deeply branching bacteria are phylogenetically
class of high G+C gram-positive bacteria. This the most ancient forms of life, being the closest
class includes the genera Actinomyces, to the last universal common ancestor.
Arthrobacter, Corynebacterium, Frankia, • Deeply branching bacteria include many species
Gardnerella, Micrococcus, Mycobacterium, that thrive in extreme environments that are
Nocardia, Cutibacterium, Rhodococcus, and thought to resemble conditions on earth billions
Streptomyces. Some representatives of these of years ago
genera are used in industry; others are human or • Deeply branching bacteria are important for our
animal pathogens. understanding of evolution; some of them are
• Examples of high G+C gram-positive bacteria used in industry
that are human pathogens include
4.6 Archaea
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which causes
tuberculosis; M. leprae, which causes leprosy • Archaea are unicellular, prokaryotic
(Hansen’s disease); and Corynebacterium microorganisms that differ from bacteria in their
diphtheriae, which causes diphtheria. genetics, biochemistry, and ecology.
• Clostridia spp. are low G+C gram-positive • Some archaea are extremophiles, living in
bacteria that are generally obligate anaerobes environments with extremely high or low
and can form endospores. Pathogens in this temperatures, or extreme salinity.
genus include C. perfringens (gas gangrene), C. • Only archaea are known to produce methane.
tetani (tetanus), and C. botulinum (botulism). Methane-producing archaea are called
• Lactobacillales include the genera Enterococcus, methanogens.
Lactobacillus, Leuconostoc, and Streptococcus. • Halophilic archaea prefer a concentration of salt
Streptococcus is responsible for many human close to saturation and perform photosynthesis
diseases, including pharyngitis (strep throat), using bacteriorhodopsin.
scarlet fever, rheumatic fever, • Some archaea, based on fossil evidence, are
glomerulonephritis, pneumonia, and other among the oldest organisms on earth.
respiratory infections. • Archaea do not live in great numbers in human
• Bacilli is a taxonomic class of low G+C gram- microbiomes and are not known to cause
positive bacteria that include rod-shaped and disease.
coccus-shaped species, including the genera
Review Questions
Multiple Choice
1 . The term prokaryotes refers to which of the 2 . The term microbiota refers to which of the
following? following?
A. very small organisms A. all microorganisms of the same species
B. unicellular organisms that have no nucleus B. all of the microorganisms involved in a
C. multicellular organisms symbiotic relationship
D. cells that resemble animal cells more than C. all microorganisms in a certain region of
plant cells the human body
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 183 ===
4 • Review Questions 169
D. all microorganisms in a certain geographic B. staphylococci
region C. Borrelia
D. Bacteroides
3 . Which of the following refers to the type of
interaction between two prokaryotic populations 10 . Which of the following refers to photosynthesis
in which one population benefits and the other is performed by bacteria with the use of water as
not affected? the donor of electrons?
A. mutualism A. oxygenic
B. commensalism B. anoxygenic
C. parasitism C. heterotrophic
D. neutralism D. phototrophic
4 . Which of the following describes Proteobacteria 11 . Which of the following bacterial species is
in domain Bacteria? classified as high G+C gram-positive?
A. phylum A. Corynebacterium diphtheriae
B. class B. Staphylococcus aureus
C. species C. Bacillus anthracis
D. genus D. Streptococcus pneumonia
5 . Which of the following Alphaproteobacteria is 12 . The term “deeply branching” refers to which of
the cause of Rocky Mountain spotted fever and the following?
typhus? A. the cellular shape of deeply branching
A. Bartonella bacteria
B. Coxiella B. the position in the evolutionary tree of
C. Rickettsia deeply branching bacteria
D. Ehrlichia C. the ability of deeply branching bacteria to
E. Brucella live in deep ocean waters
D. the pattern of growth in culture of deeply
6 . Class Betaproteobacteria includes all but which branching bacteria
of the following genera?
A. Neisseria. 13 . Which of these deeply branching bacteria is
B. Bordetella. considered a polyextremophile?
C. Leptothrix. A. Aquifex pyrophilus
D. Campylobacter. B. Deinococcus radiodurans
C. Staphylococcus aureus
7 . Haemophilus influenzae is a common cause of D. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
which of the following?
A. influenza 14 . Archaea and Bacteria are most similar in terms
B. dysentery of their ________.
C. upper respiratory tract infections A. genetics
D. hemophilia B. cell wall structure
C. ecology
8 . Which of the following is the organelle that D. unicellular structure
spirochetes use to propel themselves?
A. plasma membrane 15 . Which of the following is true of archaea that
B. axial filament produce methane?
C. pilum A. They reduce carbon dioxide in the
D. fimbria presence of nitrogen.
B. They live in the most extreme
9 . Which of the following bacteria are the most environments.
prevalent in the human gut? C. They are always anaerobes.
A. cyanobacteria D. They have been discovered on Mars.
=== PDF PAGE 184 ===
170 4 • Review Questions
True/False
16 . Among prokaryotes, there are some that can live in every environment on earth.
Fill in the Blank
17 . When prokaryotes live as interacting classified as a ________ pathogen due to the
communities in which one population benefits to characteristic production of pus in infections it
the harm of the other, the type of symbiosis is causes.
called ________.
28 . Cutibacterium belongs to ________ G+C gram-
18 . The domain ________ does not include positive bacteria. One of its species is used in
prokaryotes. the food industry and another causes acne.
19 . Pathogenic bacteria that are part of the transient 29 . The length of the branches of the evolutionary
microbiota can sometimes be eliminated by tree characterizes the evolutionary ________
________ therapy. between organisms.
20 . Nitrogen-fixing bacteria provide other organisms 30 . The deeply branching bacteria are thought to be
with usable nitrogen in the form of ________. the form of life closest to the last universal
________ ________.
21 . Rickettsias are ________ intracellular bacteria.
31 . Many of the deeply branching bacteria are
22 . The species ________, which belongs to
aquatic and hyperthermophilic, found near
Epsilonproteobacteria, causes peptic ulcers of
underwater volcanoes and thermal ocean
the stomach and duodenum.
________.
23 . The genus Salmonella belongs to the class
32 . The deeply branching bacterium Deinococcus
________ and includes pathogens that cause
radiodurans is able to survive exposure to high
salmonellosis and typhoid fever.
doses of ________.
24 . The bacterium that causes syphilis is called
33 . ________ is a genus of Archaea. Its optimal
________.
environmental temperature ranges from 70 °C
25 . Bacteria in the genus Rhodospirillum that use to 80 °C, and its optimal pH is 2–3. It oxidizes
hydrogen for oxidation and fix nitrogen are sulfur and produces sulfuric acid.
________ bacteria.
34 . ________ was once thought to be the cause of
26 . Streptococcus is the ________ of bacteria that periodontal disease, but, more recently, the
is responsible for many human diseases. causal relationship between this archaean and
the disease was not confirmed.
27 . One species of Streptococcus, S. pyogenes, is a
Short Answer
35 . Compare commensalism and amensalism. 41 . Characterize the phylum Cyanobacteria.
36 . Give an example of the changes of human 42 . Name and describe two types of S. aureus that
microbiota that result from medical intervention. show multiple antibiotic resistance.
37 . What is the metabolic difference between 43 . Briefly describe the significance of deeply
coliforms and noncoliforms? Which category branching bacteria for basic science and for
contains several species of intestinal industry.
pathogens?
44 . What is thought to account for the unique
38 . Why are Mycoplasma and Chlamydia classified radiation resistance of D. radiodurans?
as obligate intracellular pathogens?
45 . What accounts for the purple color in salt ponds
39 . Explain the term CFB group and name the inhabited by halophilic archaea?
genera that this group includes.
46 . What evidence supports the hypothesis that
40 . Name and briefly describe the bacterium that some archaea live on Mars?
causes Lyme disease.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 185 ===
4 • Review Questions 171
Critical Thinking
47 . The cell shown is found in the human stomach and
is now known to cause peptic ulcers. What is the
name of this bacterium?
FIGURE 4.29 (credit: modification of work by Janice Haney
Carr/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
49 . What is the connection between this methane bog
FIGURE 4.28 (credit: American Society for Microbiology) and archaea?
48 . The microscopic growth pattern shown is
characteristic of which genus of bacteria?
FIGURE 4.30 (credit: Chad Skeers)
=== PDF PAGE 186 ===
172 4 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org