=== PDF PAGE 267 ===
CHAPTER 7
Microbial Biochemistry
FIGURE 7.1 Scientist Stanley Miller and Harold Urey demonstrated that organic compounds may have originated naturally from inorganic
matter. The Miller-Urey experiment illustrated here simulated the effects of lightning on chemical compounds found in the earth’s early
atmosphere. The resulting reactions yielded amino acids, the chemical building blocks of proteins. (credit: modification of work by
Courtney Harrington)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
7.1 Organic Molecules
7.2 Carbohydrates
7.3 Lipids
7.4 Proteins
7.5 Using Biochemistry to Identify Microorganisms
INTRODUCTION The earth is estimated to be 4.6 billion years old, but for the first 2 billion years, the atmosphere
lacked oxygen, without which the earth could not support life as we know it. One hypothesis about how life emerged
on earth involves the concept of a “primordial soup.” This idea proposes that life began in a body of water when
metals and gases from the atmosphere combined with a source of energy, such as lightning or ultraviolet light, to
form the carbon compounds that are the chemical building blocks of life. In 1952, Stanley Miller (1930–2007), a
graduate student at the University of Chicago, and his professor Harold Urey (1893–1981), set out to confirm this
hypothesis in a now-famous experiment. Miller and Urey combined what they believed to be the major components
of the earth’s early atmosphere—water (H2O), methane (CH4), hydrogen (H2), and ammonia (NH3)—and sealed them
in a sterile flask. Next, they heated the flask to produce water vapor and passed electric sparks through the mixture
to mimic lightning in the atmosphere (Figure 7.1). When they analyzed the contents of the flask a week later, they
found amino acids, the structural units of proteins—molecules essential to the function of all organisms.
=== PDF PAGE 268 ===
254 7 • Microbial Biochemistry
7.1 Organic Molecules
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify common elements and structures found in organic molecules
• Explain the concept of isomerism
• Identify examples of functional groups
• Describe the role of functional groups in synthesizing polymers
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 1
Penny is a 16-year-old student who visited her doctor, complaining about an itchy skin rash. She had a history of
allergic episodes. The doctor looked at her sun-tanned skin and asked her if she switched to a different
sunscreen. She said she had, so the doctor diagnosed an allergic eczema. The symptoms were mild so the
doctor told Penny to avoid using the sunscreen that caused the reaction and prescribed an over-the-counter
moisturizing cream to keep her skin hydrated and to help with itching.
• What kinds of substances would you expect to find in a moisturizing cream?
• What physical or chemical properties of these substances would help alleviate itching and inflammation of
the skin?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box.
Biochemistry is the discipline that studies the chemistry of life, and its objective is to explain form and function
based on chemical principles. Organic chemistry is the discipline devoted to the study of carbon-based chemistry,
which is the foundation for the study of biomolecules and the discipline of biochemistry. Both biochemistry and
organic chemistry are based on the concepts of general chemistry, some of which are presented in Appendix A.
Elements in Living Cells
The most abundant element in cells is hydrogen (H), followed by carbon (C), oxygen (O), nitrogen (N), phosphorous
(P), and sulfur (S). We call these elements macronutrients, and they account for about 99% of the dry weight of
cells. Some elements, such as sodium (Na), potassium (K), magnesium (Mg), zinc (Zn), iron (Fe), calcium (Ca),
molybdenum (Mo), copper (Cu), cobalt (Co), manganese (Mn), or vanadium (V), are required by some cells in very
small amounts and are called micronutrients or trace elements. All of these elements are essential to the function
of many biochemical reactions, and, therefore, are essential to life.
The four most abundant elements in living matter (C, N, O, and H) have low atomic numbers and are thus light
elements capable of forming strong bonds with other atoms to produce molecules (Figure 7.2). Carbon forms four
chemical bonds, whereas nitrogen forms three, oxygen forms two, and hydrogen forms one. When bonded together
within molecules, oxygen, sulfur, and nitrogen often have one or more “lone pairs” of electrons that play important
roles in determining many of the molecules’ physical and chemical properties (see Appendix A). These traits in
combination permit the formation of a vast number of diverse molecular species necessary to form the structures
and enable the functions of living organisms.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 269 ===
7.1 • Organic Molecules 255
FIGURE 7.2 Some common molecules include carbon dioxide, ammonia, and oxygen, which consist of combinations of oxygen atoms (red
spheres), carbon atoms (gray spheres), hydrogen atoms (white spheres), or nitrogen atoms (blue spheres).
Living organisms contain inorganic compounds (mainly water and salts; see Appendix A) and organic molecules.
Organic molecules contain carbon; inorganic compounds do not. Carbon oxides and carbonates are exceptions; they
contain carbon but are considered inorganic because they do not contain hydrogen. The atoms of an organic
molecule are typically organized around chains of carbon atoms.
Inorganic compounds make up 1%–1.5% of the dry weight of living cells. They are small, simple compounds that
play important roles in the cell, although they do not form cell structures. Most of the carbon found in organic
molecules originates from inorganic carbon sources such as carbon dioxide captured via carbon fixation by
microorganisms.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Describe the most abundant elements in nature.
• What are the differences between organic and inorganic molecules?
Organic Molecules and Isomerism
Organic molecules in organisms are generally larger and more complex than inorganic molecules. Their carbon
skeletons are held together by covalent bonds. They form the cells of an organism and perform the chemical
reactions that facilitate life. All of these molecules, called biomolecules because they are part of living matter,
contain carbon, which is the building block of life. Carbon is a very unique element in that it has four valence
electrons in its outer orbitals and can form four single covalent bonds with up to four other atoms at the same time
(see Appendix A). These atoms are usually oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorous, and carbon itself; the
simplest organic compound is methane, in which carbon binds only to hydrogen (Figure 7.3).
As a result of carbon’s unique combination of size and bonding properties, carbon atoms can bind together in large
numbers, thus producing a chain or carbon skeleton. The carbon skeleton of organic molecules can be straight,
branched, or ring shaped (cyclic). Organic molecules are built on chains of carbon atoms of varying lengths; most are
typically very long, which allows for a huge number and variety of compounds. No other element has the ability to
form so many different molecules of so many different sizes and shapes.
FIGURE 7.3 A carbon atom can bond with up to four other atoms. The simplest organic molecule is methane (CH4), depicted here.
Molecules with the same atomic makeup but different structural arrangement of atoms are called isomers. The
concept of isomerism is very important in chemistry because the structure of a molecule is always directly related to
its function. Slight changes in the structural arrangements of atoms in a molecule may lead to very different
=== PDF PAGE 270 ===
256 7 • Microbial Biochemistry
properties. Chemists represent molecules by their structural formula, which is a graphic representation of the
molecular structure, showing how the atoms are arranged. Compounds that have identical molecular formulas but
differ in the bonding sequence of the atoms are called structural isomers. The monosaccharides glucose,
galactose, and fructose all have the same molecular formula, C6H12O6, but we can see from Figure 7.4 that the
atoms are bonded together differently.
FIGURE 7.4 Glucose, galactose, and fructose have the same chemical formula (C6H12O6), but these structural isomers differ in their
physical and chemical properties.
Isomers that differ in the spatial arrangements of atoms are called stereoisomers; one unique type is enantiomers.
The properties of enantiomers were originally discovered by Louis Pasteur in 1848 while using a microscope to
analyze crystallized fermentation products of wine. Enantiomers are molecules that have the characteristic of
chirality, in which their structures are nonsuperimposable mirror images of each other. Chirality is an important
characteristic in many biologically important molecules, as illustrated by the examples of structural differences in
the enantiomeric forms of the monosaccharide glucose or the amino acid alanine (Figure 7.5).
Many organisms are only able to use one enantiomeric form of certain types of molecules as nutrients and as
building blocks to make structures within a cell. Some enantiomeric forms of amino acids have distinctly different
tastes and smells when consumed as food. For example, L-aspartame, commonly called aspartame, tastes sweet,
whereas D-aspartame is tasteless. Drug enantiomers can have very different pharmacologic affects. For example,
the compound methorphan exists as two enantiomers, one of which acts as an antitussive (dextromethorphan, a
cough suppressant), whereas the other acts as an analgesic (levomethorphan, a drug similar in effect to codeine).
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 271 ===
7.1 • Organic Molecules 257
FIGURE 7.5 Enantiomers are stereoisomers that exhibit chirality. Their chemical structures are nonsuperimposable mirror images of each
other. (a) D-glucose and L-glucose are monosaccharides that are enantiomers. (b) The enantiomers D-alanine and L-alanine are
enantiomers found in bacterial cell walls and human cells, respectively.
Enantiomers are also called optical isomers because they can rotate the plane of polarized light. Some of the
crystals Pasteur observed from wine fermentation rotated light clockwise whereas others rotated the light
counterclockwise. Today, we denote enantiomers that rotate polarized light clockwise (+) as d forms, and the mirror
image of the same molecule that rotates polarized light counterclockwise (−) as the l form. The d and l labels are
derived from the Latin words dexter (on the right) and laevus (on the left), respectively. These two different optical
isomers often have very different biological properties and activities. Certain species of molds, yeast, and bacteria,
such as Rhizopus, Yarrowia, and Lactobacillus spp., respectively, can only metabolize one type of optical isomer; the
opposite isomer is not suitable as a source of nutrients. Another important reason to be aware of optical isomers is
the therapeutic use of these types of chemicals for drug treatment, because some microorganisms can only be
affected by one specific optical isomer.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• We say that life is carbon based. What makes carbon so suitable to be part of all the macromolecules of living
organisms?
Biologically Significant Functional Groups
In addition to containing carbon atoms, biomolecules also contain functional groups—groups of atoms within
molecules that are categorized by their specific chemical composition and the chemical reactions they perform,
regardless of the molecule in which the group is found. Some of the most common functional groups are listed in
Figure 7.6. In the formulas, the symbol R stands for “residue” and represents the remainder of the molecule. R
might symbolize just a single hydrogen atom or it may represent a group of many atoms. Notice that some functional
groups are relatively simple, consisting of just one or two atoms, while some comprise two of these simpler
functional groups. For example, a carbonyl group is a functional group composed of a carbon atom double bonded to
an oxygen atom: C=O. It is present in several classes of organic compounds as part of larger functional groups such
as ketones, aldehydes, carboxylic acids, and amides. In ketones, the carbonyl is present as an internal group,
whereas in aldehydes it is a terminal group.
=== PDF PAGE 272 ===
258 7 • Microbial Biochemistry
FIGURE 7.6
Macromolecules
Carbon chains form the skeletons of most organic molecules. Functional groups combine with the chain to form
biomolecules. Because these biomolecules are typically large, we call them macromolecules. Many biologically
relevant macromolecules are formed by linking together a great number of identical, or very similar, smaller organic
molecules. The smaller molecules act as building blocks and are called monomers, and the macromolecules that
result from their linkage are called polymers. Cells and cell structures include four main groups of carbon-
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 273 ===
7.2 • Carbohydrates 259
containing macromolecules: polysaccharides, proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids. The first three groups of molecules
will be studied throughout this chapter. The biochemistry of nucleic acids will be discussed in Biochemistry of the
Genome.
Of the many possible ways that monomers may be combined to yield polymers, one common approach encountered
in the formation of biological macromolecules is dehydration synthesis. In this chemical reaction, monomer
molecules bind end to end in a process that results in the formation of water molecules as a byproduct:
Figure 7.7 shows dehydration synthesis of glucose binding together to form maltose and a water molecule. Table 7.1
summarizes macromolecules and some of their functions.
FIGURE 7.7 In this dehydration synthesis reaction, two molecules of glucose are linked together to form maltose. In the process, a water
molecule is formed.
Some Functions of Macromolecules
Macromolecule Functions
Carbohydrates Energy storage, receptors, food, structural role in plants, fungal cell walls, exoskeletons of
insects
Lipids Energy storage, membrane structure, insulation, hormones, pigments
Nucleic acids Storage and transfer of genetic information
Proteins Enzymes, structure, receptors, transport, structural role in the cytoskeleton of a cell and the
extracellular matrix
TABLE 7.1
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What is the byproduct of a dehydration synthesis reaction?
7.2 Carbohydrates
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Give examples of monosaccharides and polysaccharides
• Describe the function of monosaccharides and polysaccharides within a cell
The most abundant biomolecules on earth are carbohydrates. From a chemical viewpoint, carbohydrates are
primarily a combination of carbon and water, and many of them have the empirical formula (CH2O)n, where n is the
number of repeated units. This view represents these molecules simply as “hydrated” carbon atom chains in which
water molecules attach to each carbon atom, leading to the term “carbohydrates.” Although all carbohydrates
contain carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, there are some that also contain nitrogen, phosphorus, and/or sulfur.
Carbohydrates have myriad different functions. They are abundant in terrestrial ecosystems, many forms of which
we use as food sources. These molecules are also vital parts of macromolecular structures that store and transmit
=== PDF PAGE 274 ===
260 7 • Microbial Biochemistry
genetic information (i.e., DNA and RNA). They are the basis of biological polymers that impart strength to various
structural components of organisms (e.g., cellulose and chitin), and they are the primary source of energy storage in
the form of starch and glycogen.
Monosaccharides: The Sweet Ones
In biochemistry, carbohydrates are often called saccharides, from the Greek sakcharon, meaning sugar, although
not all the saccharides are sweet. The simplest carbohydrates are called monosaccharides, or simple sugars. They
are the building blocks (monomers) for the synthesis of polymers or complex carbohydrates, as will be discussed
further in this section. Monosaccharides are classified based on the number of carbons in the molecule. General
categories are identified using a prefix that indicates the number of carbons and the suffix –ose, which indicates a
saccharide; for example, triose (three carbons), tetrose (four carbons), pentose (five carbons), and hexose (six
carbons) (Figure 7.8). The hexose D-glucose is the most abundant monosaccharide in nature. Other very common
and abundant hexose monosaccharides are galactose, used to make the disaccharide milk sugar lactose, and the
fruit sugar fructose.
FIGURE 7.8 Monosaccharides are classified based on the position of the carbonyl group and the number of carbons in the backbone.
Monosaccharides of four or more carbon atoms are typically more stable when they adopt cyclic, or ring, structures.
These ring structures result from a chemical reaction between functional groups on opposite ends of the sugar’s
flexible carbon chain, namely the carbonyl group and a relatively distant hydroxyl group. Glucose, for example,
forms a six-membered ring (Figure 7.9).
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 275 ===
7.2 • Carbohydrates 261
FIGURE 7.9 (a) A linear monosaccharide (glucose in this case) forms a cyclic structure. (b) This illustration shows a more realistic depiction
of the cyclic monosaccharide structure. Note in these cyclic structural diagrams, the carbon atoms composing the ring are not explicitly
shown.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Why do monosaccharides form ring structures?
Disaccharides
Two monosaccharide molecules may chemically bond to form a disaccharide. The name given to the covalent bond
between the two monosaccharides is a glycosidic bond. Glycosidic bonds form between hydroxyl groups of the two
saccharide molecules, an example of the dehydration synthesis described in the previous section of this chapter:
Common disaccharides are the grain sugar maltose, made of two glucose molecules; the milk sugar lactose, made
of a galactose and a glucose molecule; and the table sugar sucrose, made of a glucose and a fructose molecule
(Figure 7.10).
FIGURE 7.10 Common disaccharides include maltose, lactose, and sucrose.
=== PDF PAGE 276 ===
262 7 • Microbial Biochemistry
Polysaccharides
Polysaccharides, also called glycans, are large polymers composed of hundreds of monosaccharide monomers.
Unlike mono- and disaccharides, polysaccharides are not sweet and, in general, they are not soluble in water. Like
disaccharides, the monomeric units of polysaccharides are linked together by glycosidic bonds.
Polysaccharides are very diverse in their structure. Three of the most biologically important
polysaccharides—starch, glycogen, and cellulose—are all composed of repetitive glucose units, although they differ
in their structure (Figure 7.11). Cellulose consists of a linear chain of glucose molecules and is a common structural
component of cell walls in plants and other organisms. Glycogen and starch are branched polymers; glycogen is the
primary energy-storage molecule in animals and bacteria, whereas plants primarily store energy in starch. The
orientation of the glycosidic linkages in these three polymers is different as well and, as a consequence, linear and
branched macromolecules have different properties.
Modified glucose molecules can be fundamental components of other structural polysaccharides. Examples of
these types of structural polysaccharides are N-acetyl glucosamine (NAG) and N-acetyl muramic acid (NAM) found
in bacterial cell wall peptidoglycan. Polymers of NAG form chitin, which is found in fungal cell walls and in the
exoskeleton of insects.
FIGURE 7.11 Starch, glycogen, and cellulose are three of the most important polysaccharides. In the top row, hexagons represent
individual glucose molecules. Micrographs (bottom row) show wheat starch granules stained with iodine (left), glycogen granules (G) inside
the cell of a cyanobacterium (middle), and bacterial cellulose fibers (right). (credit “iodine granules”: modification of work by Kiselov Yuri;
credit “glycogen granules”: modification of work by Stöckel J, Elvitigala TR, Liberton M, Pakrasi HB; credit “cellulose”: modification of work
by American Society for Microbiology)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What are the most biologically important polysaccharides and why are they important?
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 277 ===
7.3 • Lipids 263
7.3 Lipids
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the chemical composition of lipids
• Describe the unique characteristics and diverse structures of lipids
• Compare and contrast triacylglycerides (triglycerides) and phospholipids.
• Describe how phospholipids are used to construct biological membranes.
Although they are composed primarily of carbon and hydrogen, lipid molecules may also contain oxygen, nitrogen,
sulfur, and phosphorous. Lipids serve numerous and diverse purposes in the structure and functions of organisms.
They can be a source of nutrients, a storage form for carbon, energy-storage molecules, or structural components of
membranes and hormones. Lipids comprise a broad class of many chemically distinct compounds, the most
common of which are discussed in this section.
Fatty Acids and Triacylglycerides
The fatty acids are lipids that contain long-chain hydrocarbons terminated with a carboxylic acid functional group.
Because of the long hydrocarbon chain, fatty acids are hydrophobic (“water fearing”) or nonpolar. Fatty acids with
hydrocarbon chains that contain only single bonds are called saturated fatty acids because they have the greatest
number of hydrogen atoms possible and are, therefore, “saturated” with hydrogen. Fatty acids with hydrocarbon
chains containing at least one double bond are called unsaturated fatty acids because they have fewer hydrogen
atoms. Saturated fatty acids have a straight, flexible carbon backbone, whereas unsaturated fatty acids have “kinks”
in their carbon skeleton because each double bond causes a rigid bend of the carbon skeleton. These differences in
saturated versus unsaturated fatty acid structure result in different properties for the corresponding lipids in which
the fatty acids are incorporated. For example, lipids containing saturated fatty acids are solids at room temperature,
whereas lipids containing unsaturated fatty acids are liquids.
A triacylglycerol, or triglyceride, is formed when three fatty acids are chemically linked to a glycerol molecule
(Figure 7.12). Triglycerides are the primary components of adipose tissue (body fat), and are major constituents of
sebum (skin oils). They play an important metabolic role, serving as efficient energy-storage molecules that can
provide more than double the caloric content of both carbohydrates and proteins.
FIGURE 7.12 Triglycerides are composed of a glycerol molecule attached to three fatty acids by a dehydration synthesis reaction.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Explain why fatty acids with hydrocarbon chains that contain only single bonds are called saturated fatty
acids.
Phospholipids and Biological Membranes
Triglycerides are classified as simple lipids because they are formed from just two types of compounds: glycerol and
fatty acids. In contrast, complex lipids contain at least one additional component, for example, a phosphate group
(phospholipids) or a carbohydrate moiety (glycolipids). Figure 7.13 depicts a typical phospholipid composed of two
=== PDF PAGE 278 ===
264 7 • Microbial Biochemistry
fatty acids linked to glycerol (a diglyceride). The two fatty acid carbon chains may be both saturated, both
unsaturated, or one of each. Instead of another fatty acid molecule (as for triglycerides), the third binding position
on the glycerol molecule is occupied by a modified phosphate group.
FIGURE 7.13 This illustration shows a phospholipid with two different fatty acids, one saturated and one unsaturated, bonded to the
glycerol molecule. The unsaturated fatty acid has a slight kink in its structure due to the double bond.
The molecular structure of lipids results in unique behavior in aqueous environments. Figure 7.12 depicts the
structure of a triglyceride. Because all three substituents on the glycerol backbone are long hydrocarbon chains,
these compounds are nonpolar and not significantly attracted to polar water molecules—they are hydrophobic.
Conversely, phospholipids such as the one shown in Figure 7.13 have a negatively charged phosphate group.
Because the phosphate is charged, it is capable of strong attraction to water molecules and thus is hydrophilic, or
“water loving.” The hydrophilic portion of the phospholipid is often referred to as a polar “head,” and the long
hydrocarbon chains as nonpolar “tails.” A molecule presenting a hydrophobic portion and a hydrophilic moiety is
said to be amphipathic. Notice the “R” designation within the hydrophilic head depicted in Figure 7.13, indicating
that a polar head group can be more complex than a simple phosphate moiety. Glycolipids are examples in which
carbohydrates are bonded to the lipids’ head groups.
The amphipathic nature of phospholipids enables them to form uniquely functional structures in aqueous
environments. As mentioned, the polar heads of these molecules are strongly attracted to water molecules, and the
nonpolar tails are not. Because of their considerable lengths, these tails are, in fact, strongly attracted to one
another. As a result, energetically stable, large-scale assemblies of phospholipid molecules are formed in which the
hydrophobic tails congregate within enclosed regions, shielded from contact with water by the polar heads (Figure
7.14). The simplest of these structures are micelles, spherical assemblies containing a hydrophobic interior of
phospholipid tails and an outer surface of polar head groups. Larger and more complex structures are created from
lipid-bilayer sheets, or unit membranes, which are large, two-dimensional assemblies of phospholipids
congregated tail to tail. The cell membranes of nearly all organisms are made from lipid-bilayer sheets, as are the
membranes of many intracellular components. These sheets may also form lipid-bilayer spheres that are the
structural basis of vesicles and liposomes, subcellular components that play a role in numerous physiological
functions.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 279 ===
7.3 • Lipids 265
FIGURE 7.14 Phospholipids tend to arrange themselves in aqueous solution forming liposomes, micelles, or lipid bilayer sheets. (credit:
modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How is the amphipathic nature of phospholipids significant?
Isoprenoids and Sterols
The isoprenoids are branched lipids, also referred to as terpenoids, that are formed by chemical modifications of
the isoprene molecule (Figure 7.15). These lipids play a wide variety of physiological roles in plants and animals,
with many technological uses as pharmaceuticals (capsaicin), pigments (e.g., orange beta carotene, xanthophylls),
and fragrances (e.g., menthol, camphor, limonene [lemon fragrance], and pinene [pine fragrance]). Long-chain
isoprenoids are also found in hydrophobic oils and waxes. Waxes are typically water resistant and hard at room
temperature, but they soften when heated and liquefy if warmed adequately. In humans, the main wax production
occurs within the sebaceous glands of hair follicles in the skin, resulting in a secreted material called sebum, which
consists mainly of triacylglycerol, wax esters, and the hydrocarbon squalene. There are many bacteria in the
microbiota on the skin that feed on these lipids. One of the most prominent bacteria that feed on lipids is
Cutibacterium acnes, which uses the skin’s lipids to generate short-chain fatty acids and is involved in the
production of acne.
=== PDF PAGE 280 ===
266 7 • Microbial Biochemistry
FIGURE 7.15 Five-carbon isoprene molecules are chemically modified in various ways to yield isoprenoids.
Another type of lipids are steroids, complex, ringed structures that are found in cell membranes; some function as
hormones. The most common types of steroids are sterols, which are steroids containing an OH group. These are
mainly hydrophobic molecules, but also have hydrophilic hydroxyl groups. The most common sterol found in animal
tissues is cholesterol. Its structure consists of four rings with a double bond in one of the rings, and a hydroxyl group
at the sterol-defining position. The function of cholesterol is to strengthen cell membranes in eukaryotes and in
bacteria without cell walls, such as Mycoplasma. Prokaryotes generally do not produce cholesterol, although
bacteria produce similar compounds called hopanoids, which are also multiringed structures that strengthen
bacterial membranes (Figure 7.16). Fungi and some protozoa produce a similar compound called ergosterol, which
strengthens the cell membranes of these organisms.
FIGURE 7.16 Cholesterol and hopene (a hopanoid compound) are molecules that reinforce the structure of the cell membranes in
eukaryotes and prokaryotes, respectively.
LINK TO LEARNING
Liposomes
This video (https://openstax.org/l/22liposomes) provides additional information about phospholipids and
liposomes.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How are isoprenoids used in technology?
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 281 ===
7.4 • Proteins 267
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 2
The moisturizing cream prescribed by Penny’s doctor was a topical corticosteroid cream containing
hydrocortisone. Hydrocortisone is a synthetic form of cortisol, a corticosteroid hormone produced in the adrenal
glands, from cholesterol. When applied directly to the skin, it can reduce inflammation and temporarily relieve
minor skin irritations, itching, and rashes by reducing the secretion of histamine, a compound produced by cells
of the immune system in response to the presence of pathogens or other foreign substances. Because histamine
triggers the body’s inflammatory response, the ability of hydrocortisone to reduce the local production of
histamine in the skin effectively suppresses the immune system and helps limit inflammation and accompanying
symptoms such as pruritus (itching) and rashes.
• Does the corticosteroid cream treat the cause of Penny’s rash, or just the symptoms?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
7.4 Proteins
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the fundamental structure of an amino acid
• Describe the chemical structures of proteins
• Summarize the unique characteristics of proteins
At the beginning of this chapter, a famous experiment was described in which scientists synthesized amino acids
under conditions simulating those present on earth long before the evolution of life as we know it. These
compounds are capable of bonding together in essentially any number, yielding molecules of essentially any size
that possess a wide array of physical and chemical properties and perform numerous functions vital to all
organisms. The molecules derived from amino acids can function as structural components of cells and subcellular
entities, as sources of nutrients, as atom- and energy-storage reservoirs, and as functional species such as
hormones, enzymes, receptors, and transport molecules.
Amino Acids and Peptide Bonds
An amino acid is an organic molecule in which a hydrogen atom, a carboxyl group (–COOH), and an amino group
(–NH2) are all bonded to the same carbon atom, the so-called α carbon. The fourth group bonded to the α carbon
varies among the different amino acids and is called a residue or a side chain, represented in structural formulas by
the letter R. A residue is a monomer that results when two or more amino acids combine and remove water
molecules. The primary structure of a protein, a peptide chain, is made of amino acid residues. The unique
characteristics of the functional groups and R groups allow these components of the amino acids to form hydrogen,
ionic, and disulfide bonds, along with polar/nonpolar interactions needed to form secondary, tertiary, and
quaternary protein structures. These groups are composed primarily of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and
sulfur, in the form of hydrocarbons, acids, amides, alcohols, and amines. A few examples illustrating these
possibilities are provided in Figure 7.17.
=== PDF PAGE 282 ===
268 7 • Microbial Biochemistry
FIGURE 7.17
Amino acids may chemically bond together by reaction of the carboxylic acid group of one molecule with the amine
group of another. This reaction forms a peptide bond and a water molecule and is another example of dehydration
synthesis (Figure 7.18). Molecules formed by chemically linking relatively modest numbers of amino acids
(approximately 50 or fewer) are called peptides, and prefixes are often used to specify these numbers: dipeptides
(two amino acids), tripeptides (three amino acids), and so forth. More generally, the approximate number of amino
acids is designated: oligopeptides are formed by joining up to approximately 20 amino acids, whereas
polypeptides are synthesized from up to approximately 50 amino acids. When the number of amino acids linked
together becomes very large, or when multiple polypeptides are used as building subunits, the macromolecules that
result are called proteins. The continuously variable length (the number of monomers) of these biopolymers, along
with the variety of possible R groups on each amino acid, allows for a nearly unlimited diversity in the types of
proteins that may be formed.
FIGURE 7.18 Peptide bond formation is a dehydration synthesis reaction. The carboxyl group of the first amino acid (alanine) is linked to
the amino group of the incoming second amino acid (alanine). In the process, a molecule of water is released.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• How many amino acids are in polypeptides?
Protein Structure
The size (length) and specific amino acid sequence of a protein are major determinants of its shape, and the shape
of a protein is critical to its function. For example, in the process of biological nitrogen fixation (see Biogeochemical
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 283 ===
7.4 • Proteins 269
Cycles), soil microorganisms collectively known as rhizobia symbiotically interact with roots of legume plants such
as soybeans, peanuts, or beans to form a novel structure called a nodule on the plant roots. The plant then produces
a carrier protein called leghemoglobin, a protein that carries nitrogen or oxygen. Leghemoglobin binds with a very
high affinity to its substrate oxygen at a specific region of the protein where the shape and amino acid sequence are
appropriate (the active site). If the shape or chemical environment of the active site is altered, even slightly, the
substrate may not be able to bind as strongly, or it may not bind at all. Thus, for the protein to be fully active, it must
have the appropriate shape for its function.
Protein structure is categorized in terms of four levels: primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary. The primary
structure is simply the sequence of amino acids that make up the polypeptide chain. Figure 7.19 depicts the
primary structure of a protein.
The chain of amino acids that defines a protein’s primary structure is not rigid, but instead is flexible because of the
nature of the bonds that hold the amino acids together. When the chain is sufficiently long, hydrogen bonding may
occur between amine and carbonyl functional groups within the peptide backbone (excluding the R side group),
resulting in localized folding of the polypeptide chain into helices and sheets. These shapes constitute a protein’s
secondary structure. The most common secondary structures are the α-helix and β-pleated sheet. In the α-helix
structure, the helix is held by hydrogen bonds between the oxygen atom in a carbonyl group of one amino acid and
the hydrogen atom of the amino group that is just four amino acid units farther along the chain. In the β-pleated
sheet, the pleats are formed by similar hydrogen bonds between continuous sequences of carbonyl and amino
groups that are further separated on the backbone of the polypeptide chain (Figure 7.20).
The next level of protein organization is the tertiary structure, which is the large-scale three-dimensional shape of a
single polypeptide chain. Tertiary structure is determined by interactions between amino acid residues that are far
apart in the chain. A variety of interactions give rise to protein tertiary structure, such as disulfide bridges, which
are bonds between the sulfhydryl (–SH) functional groups on amino acid side groups; hydrogen bonds; ionic bonds;
and hydrophobic interactions between nonpolar side chains. All these interactions, weak and strong, combine to
determine the final three-dimensional shape of the protein and its function (Figure 7.21).
The process by which a polypeptide chain assumes a large-scale, three-dimensional shape is called protein folding.
Folded proteins that are fully functional in their normal biological role are said to possess a native structure. When
a protein loses its three-dimensional shape, it may no longer be functional. These unfolded proteins are denatured.
Denaturation implies the loss of the secondary structure and tertiary structure (and, if present, the quaternary
structure) without the loss of the primary structure.
Some proteins are assemblies of several separate polypeptides, also known as protein subunits. These proteins
function adequately only when all subunits are present and appropriately configured. The interactions that hold
these subunits together constitute the quaternary structure of the protein. The overall quaternary structure is
stabilized by relatively weak interactions. Hemoglobin, for example, has a quaternary structure of four globular
protein subunits: two α and two β polypeptides, each one containing an iron-based heme (Figure 7.22).
Another important class of proteins is the conjugated proteins that have a nonprotein portion. If the conjugated
protein has a carbohydrate attached, it is called a glycoprotein. If it has a lipid attached, it is called a lipoprotein.
These proteins are important components of membranes. Figure 7.23 summarizes the four levels of protein
structure.
=== PDF PAGE 284 ===
270 7 • Microbial Biochemistry
FIGURE 7.19 The primary structure of a protein is the sequence of amino acids. (credit: modification of work by National Human Genome
Research Institute)
FIGURE 7.20 The secondary structure of a protein may be an α-helix or a β-pleated sheet, or both.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 285 ===
7.4 • Proteins 271
FIGURE 7.21 The tertiary structure of proteins is determined by a variety of attractive forces, including hydrophobic interactions, ionic
bonding, hydrogen bonding, and disulfide linkages.
FIGURE 7.22 A hemoglobin molecule has two α and two β polypeptides together with four heme groups.
=== PDF PAGE 286 ===
272 7 • Microbial Biochemistry
FIGURE 7.23 Protein structure has four levels of organization. (credit: modification of work by National Human Genome Research Institute)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What can happen if a protein’s primary, secondary, tertiary, or quaternary structure is changed?
MICRO CONNECTIONS
Primary Structure, Dysfunctional Proteins, and Cystic Fibrosis
Proteins associated with biological membranes are classified as extrinsic or intrinsic. Extrinsic proteins, also called
peripheral proteins, are loosely associated with one side of the membrane. Intrinsic proteins, or integral proteins,
are embedded in the membrane and often function as part of transport systems as transmembrane proteins. Cystic
fibrosis (CF) is a human genetic disorder caused by a change in the transmembrane protein. It affects mostly the
lungs but may also affect the pancreas, liver, kidneys, and intestine. CF is caused by a loss of the amino acid
phenylalanine in a cystic fibrosis transmembrane protein (CFTR). The loss of one amino acid changes the primary
structure of a protein that normally helps transport salt and water in and out of cells (Figure 7.24).
The change in the primary structure prevents the protein from functioning properly, which causes the body to
produce unusually thick mucus that clogs the lungs and leads to the accumulation of sticky mucus. The mucus
obstructs the pancreas and stops natural enzymes from helping the body break down food and absorb vital
nutrients.
In the lungs of individuals with cystic fibrosis, the altered mucus provides an environment where bacteria can thrive.
This colonization leads to the formation of biofilms in the small airways of the lungs. The most common pathogens
found in the lungs of patients with cystic fibrosis are Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Figure 7.25) and Burkholderia
cepacia. Pseudomonas differentiates within the biofilm in the lung and forms large colonies, called “mucoid”
Pseudomonas. The colonies have a unique pigmentation that shows up in laboratory tests (Figure 7.25) and
provides physicians with the first clue that the patient has CF (such colonies are rare in healthy individuals).
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 287 ===
7.5 • Using Biochemistry to Identify Microorganisms 273
FIGURE 7.24 The normal CFTR protein is a channel protein that helps salt (sodium chloride) move in and out of cells.
FIGURE 7.25 (a) A scanning electron micrograph shows the opportunistic bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa. (b) Pigment-producing P.
aeruginosa on cetrimide agar shows the green pigment called pyocyanin. (credit a: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention)
LINK TO LEARNING
For more information about cystic fibrosis, visit the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (https://openstax.org/l/
22cystfibrofoun) website.
7.5 Using Biochemistry to Identify Microorganisms
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe examples of biosynthesis products within a cell that can be detected to identify bacteria
Accurate identification of bacterial isolates is essential in a clinical microbiology laboratory because the results
often inform decisions about treatment that directly affect patient outcomes. For example, cases of food poisoning
require accurate identification of the causative agent so that physicians can prescribe appropriate treatment.
=== PDF PAGE 288 ===
274 7 • Microbial Biochemistry
Likewise, it is important to accurately identify the causative pathogen during an outbreak of disease so that
appropriate strategies can be employed to contain the epidemic.
There are many ways to detect, characterize, and identify microorganisms. Some methods rely on phenotypic
biochemical characteristics, while others use genotypic identification. The biochemical characteristics of a
bacterium provide many traits that are useful for classification and identification. Analyzing the nutritional and
metabolic capabilities of the bacterial isolate is a common approach for determining the genus and the species of
the bacterium. Some of the most important metabolic pathways that bacteria use to survive will be discussed in
Microbial Metabolism. In this section, we will discuss a few methods that use biochemical characteristics to identify
microorganisms.
Some microorganisms store certain compounds as granules within their cytoplasm, and the contents of these
granules can be used for identification purposes. For example, poly-β-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) is a carbon- and
energy-storage compound found in some nonfluorescent bacteria of the genus Pseudomonas. Different species
within this genus can be classified by the presence or the absence of PHB and fluorescent pigments. The human
pathogen P. aeruginosa and the plant pathogen P. syringae are two examples of fluorescent Pseudomonas species
that do not accumulate PHB granules.
Other systems rely on biochemical characteristics to identify microorganisms by their biochemical reactions, such
as carbon utilization and other metabolic tests. In small laboratory settings or in teaching laboratories, those assays
are carried out using a limited number of test tubes. However, more modern systems, such as the one developed by
Biolog, Inc., are based on panels of biochemical reactions performed simultaneously and analyzed by software.
Biolog’s system identifies cells based on their ability to metabolize certain biochemicals and on their physiological
properties, including pH and chemical sensitivity. It uses all major classes of biochemicals in its analysis.
Identifications can be performed manually or with the semi- or fully automated instruments.
Another automated system identifies microorganisms by determining the specimen’s mass spectrum and then
comparing it to a database that contains known mass spectra for thousands of microorganisms. This method is
based on matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF) and uses
disposable MALDI plates on which the microorganism is mixed with a specialized matrix reagent (Figure 7.26). The
sample/reagent mixture is irradiated with a high-intensity pulsed ultraviolet laser, resulting in the ejection of
gaseous ions generated from the various chemical constituents of the microorganism. These gaseous ions are
collected and accelerated through the mass spectrometer, with ions traveling at a velocity determined by their
mass-to-charge ratio (m/z), thus, reaching the detector at different times. A plot of detector signal versus m/z yields
a mass spectrum for the organism that is uniquely related to its biochemical composition. Comparison of the mass
spectrum to a library of reference spectra obtained from identical analyses of known microorganisms permits
identification of the unknown microbe.
FIGURE 7.26 MALDI-TOF methods are now routinely used for diagnostic procedures in clinical microbiology laboratories. This technology is
able to rapidly identify some microorganisms that cannot be readily identified by more traditional methods. (credit “MALDI plate photo”:
modification of work by Chen Q, Liu T, Chen G; credit “graphs”: modification of work by Bailes J, Vidal L, Ivanov DA, Soloviev M)
Microbes can also be identified by measuring their unique lipid profiles. As we have learned, fatty acids of lipids can
vary in chain length, presence or absence of double bonds, and number of double bonds, hydroxyl groups, branches,
and rings. To identify a microbe by its lipid composition, the fatty acids present in their membranes are analyzed. A
common biochemical analysis used for this purpose is a technique used in clinical, public health, and food
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 289 ===
7.5 • Using Biochemistry to Identify Microorganisms 275
laboratories. It relies on detecting unique differences in fatty acids and is called fatty acid methyl ester (FAME)
analysis. In a FAME analysis, fatty acids are extracted from the membranes of microorganisms, chemically altered
to form volatile methyl esters, and analyzed by gas chromatography (GC). The resulting GC chromatogram is
compared with reference chromatograms in a database containing data for thousands of bacterial isolates to
identify the unknown microorganism (Figure 7.27).
FIGURE 7.27 Fatty acid methyl ester (FAME) analysis in bacterial identification results in a chromatogram unique to each bacterium. Each
peak in the gas chromatogram corresponds to a particular fatty acid methyl ester and its height is proportional to the amount present in the
cell. (credit “culture”: modification of work by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit “graph”: modification of work by Zhang
P. and Liu P.)
A related method for microorganism identification is called phospholipid-derived fatty acids (PLFA) analysis.
Membranes are mostly composed of phospholipids, which can be saponified (hydrolyzed with alkali) to release the
fatty acids. The resulting fatty acid mixture is then subjected to FAME analysis, and the measured lipid profiles can
be compared with those of known microorganisms to identify the unknown microorganism.
Bacterial identification can also be based on the proteins produced under specific growth conditions within the
human body. These types of identification procedures are called proteomic analysis. To perform proteomic
analysis, proteins from the pathogen are first separated by high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC), and the
collected fractions are then digested to yield smaller peptide fragments. These peptides are identified by mass
spectrometry and compared with those of known microorganisms to identify the unknown microorganism in the
original specimen.
Microorganisms can also be identified by the carbohydrates attached to proteins (glycoproteins) in the plasma
membrane or cell wall. Antibodies and other carbohydrate-binding proteins can attach to specific carbohydrates on
cell surfaces, causing the cells to clump together. Serological tests (e.g., the Lancefield groups tests, which are used
for identification of Streptococcus species) are performed to detect the unique carbohydrates located on the surface
of the cell.
CLINICAL FOCUS
Resolution
Penny stopped using her new sunscreen and applied the corticosteroid cream to her rash as directed. However,
after several days, her rash had not improved and actually seemed to be getting worse. She made a follow-up
appointment with her doctor, who observed a bumpy red rash and pus-filled blisters around hair follicles (Figure
7.28). The rash was especially concentrated in areas that would have been covered by a swimsuit. After some
questioning, Penny told the physician that she had recently attended a pool party and spent some time in a hot
tub. In light of this new information, the doctor suspected a case of hot tub rash, an infection frequently caused
by the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an opportunistic pathogen that can thrive in hot tubs and swimming
pools, especially when the water is not sufficiently chlorinated. P. aeruginosa is the same bacterium that is
associated with infections in the lungs of patients with cystic fibrosis.
The doctor collected a specimen from Penny’s rash to be sent to the clinical microbiology lab. Confirmatory tests
=== PDF PAGE 290 ===
276 7 • Microbial Biochemistry
were carried out to distinguish P. aeruginosa from enteric pathogens that can also be present in pool and hot-tub
water. The test included the production of the blue-green pigment pyocyanin on cetrimide agar and growth at 42
°C. Cetrimide is a selective agent that inhibits the growth of other species of microbial flora and also enhances
the production of P. aeruginosa pigments pyocyanin and fluorescein, which are a characteristic blue-green and
yellow-green, respectively.
Tests confirmed the presence of P. aeruginosa in Penny’s skin sample, but the doctor decided not to prescribe
an antibiotic. Even though P. aeruginosa is a bacterium, Pseudomonas species are generally resistant to many
antibiotics. Luckily, skin infections like Penny’s are usually self-limiting; the rash typically lasts about 2 weeks
and resolves on its own, with or without medical treatment. The doctor advised Penny to wait it out and keep
using the corticosteroid cream. The cream will not kill the P. aeruginosa on Penny’s skin, but it should calm her
rash and minimize the itching by suppressing her body’s inflammatory response to the bacteria.
FIGURE 7.28 Exposure to Pseudomonas aeruginosa in the water of a pool or hot tub can sometimes cause a skin infection that
manifests as “hot tub rash.” (credit: modification of work by “Lsupellmel”/Wikimedia Commons)
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 291 ===
7 • Summary 277
Summary
7.1 Organic Molecules are all composed of branched chains of glucose
molecules.
• The most abundant elements in cells are
• The polysaccharide cellulose is a common
hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus,
structural component of the cell walls of
and sulfur.
organisms. Other structural polysaccharides,
• Life is carbon based. Each carbon atom can bind
such as N-acetyl glucosamine (NAG) and N-
to another one producing a carbon skeleton that
acetyl muramic acid (NAM), incorporate modified
can be straight, branched, or ring shaped.
glucose molecules and are used in the
• The same numbers and types of atoms may bond
construction of peptidoglycan or chitin.
together in different ways to yield different
molecules called isomers. Isomers may differ in 7.3 Lipids
the bonding sequence of their atoms (structural
• Lipids are composed mainly of carbon and
isomers) or in the spatial arrangement of atoms
hydrogen, but they can also contain oxygen,
whose bonding sequences are the same
nitrogen, sulfur, and phosphorous. They provide
(stereoisomers), and their physical and chemical
nutrients for organisms, store carbon and energy,
properties may vary slightly or drastically.
play structural roles in membranes, and function
• Functional groups confer specific chemical
as hormones, pharmaceuticals, fragrances, and
properties to molecules bearing them. Common
pigments.
functional groups in biomolecules are hydroxyl,
• Fatty acids are long-chain hydrocarbons with a
methyl, carbonyl, carboxyl, amino, phosphate,
carboxylic acid functional group. Their relatively
and sulfhydryl.
long nonpolar hydrocarbon chains make them
• Macromolecules are polymers assembled from
hydrophobic. Fatty acids with no double bonds
individual units, the monomers, which bind
are saturated; those with double bonds are
together like building blocks. Many biologically
unsaturated.
significant macromolecules are formed by
• Fatty acids chemically bond to glycerol to form
dehydration synthesis, a process in which
structurally essential lipids such as triglycerides
monomers bind together by combining their
and phospholipids. Triglycerides comprise three
functional groups and generating water
fatty acids bonded to glycerol, yielding a
molecules as byproducts.
hydrophobic molecule. Phospholipids contain
7.2 Carbohydrates both hydrophobic hydrocarbon chains and polar
head groups, making them amphipathic and
• Carbohydrates, the most abundant
capable of forming uniquely functional large
biomolecules on earth, are widely used by
scale structures.
organisms for structural and energy-storage
• Biological membranes are large-scale structures
purposes.
based on phospholipid bilayers that provide
• Carbohydrates include individual sugar
hydrophilic exterior and interior surfaces suitable
molecules (monosaccharides) as well as two or
for aqueous environments, separated by an
more molecules chemically linked by glycosidic
intervening hydrophobic layer. These bilayers are
bonds. Monosaccharides are classified based on
the structural basis for cell membranes in most
the number of carbons the molecule as trioses (3
organisms, as well as subcellular components
C), tetroses (4 C), pentoses (5 C), and hexoses (6
such as vesicles.
C). They are the building blocks for the synthesis
• Isoprenoids are lipids derived from isoprene
of polymers or complex carbohydrates.
molecules that have many physiological roles
• Disaccharides such as sucrose, lactose, and
and a variety of commercial applications.
maltose are molecules composed of two
• A wax is a long-chain isoprenoid that is typically
monosaccharides linked together by a glycosidic
water resistant; an example of a wax-containing
bond.
substance is sebum, produced by sebaceous
• Polysaccharides, or glycans, are polymers
glands in the skin. Steroids are lipids with
composed of hundreds of monosaccharide
complex, ringed structures that function as
monomers linked together by glycosidic bonds.
structural components of cell membranes and as
The energy-storage polymers starch and
hormones. Sterols are a subclass of steroids
glycogen are examples of polysaccharides and
containing a hydroxyl group at a specific location
=== PDF PAGE 292 ===
278 7 • Review Questions
on one of the molecule’s rings; one example is subunits composing the quaternary structure of
cholesterol. the protein complex.
• Bacteria produce hopanoids, structurally similar • Conjugated proteins have a nonpolypeptide
to cholesterol, to strengthen bacterial portion that can be a carbohydrate (forming a
membranes. Fungi and protozoa produce a glycoprotein) or a lipid fraction (forming a
strengthening agent called ergosterol. lipoprotein). These proteins are important
components of membranes.
7.4 Proteins
7.5 Using Biochemistry to Identify
• Amino acids are small molecules essential to all
Microorganisms
life. Each has an α carbon to which a hydrogen
atom, carboxyl group, and amine group are • Accurate identification of bacteria is essential in
bonded. The fourth bonded group, represented a clinical laboratory for diagnostic and
by R, varies in chemical composition, size, management of epidemics, pandemics, and food
polarity, and charge among different amino acids, poisoning caused by bacterial outbreaks.
providing variation in properties. • The phenotypic identification of microorganisms
• Peptides are polymers formed by the linkage of involves using observable traits, including
amino acids via dehydration synthesis. The profiles of structural components such as lipids,
bonds between the linked amino acids are called biosynthetic products such as sugars or amino
peptide bonds. The number of amino acids acids, or storage compounds such as poly-β-
linked together may vary from a few to many. hydroxybutyrate.
• Proteins are polymers formed by the linkage of a • An unknown microbe may be identified from the
very large number of amino acids. They perform unique mass spectrum produced when it is
many important functions in a cell, serving as analyzed by matrix assisted laser desorption/
nutrients and enzymes; storage molecules for ionization time of flight mass spectrometry
carbon, nitrogen, and energy; and structural (MALDI-TOF).
components. • Microbes can be identified by determining their
• The structure of a protein is a critical lipid compositions, using fatty acid methyl
determinant of its function and is described by a esters (FAME) or phospholipid-derived fatty
graduated classification: primary, secondary, acids (PLFA) analysis.
tertiary, and quaternary. The native structure • Proteomic analysis, the study of all accumulated
of a protein may be disrupted by denaturation, proteins of an organism; can also be used for
resulting in loss of its higher-order structure and bacterial identification.
its biological function. • Glycoproteins in the plasma membrane or cell
• Some proteins are formed by several separate wall structures can bind to lectins or antibodies
protein subunits, the interaction of these and can be used for identification.
Review Questions
Multiple Choice
1 . Which of these elements is not a micronutrient? 3 . By definition, carbohydrates contain which
A. C elements?
B. Ca A. carbon and hydrogen
C. Co B. carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen
D. Cu C. carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen
D. carbon and oxygen
2 . Which of the following is the name for molecules
whose structures are nonsuperimposable mirror 4 . Monosaccharides may link together to form
images? polysaccharides by forming which type of bond?
A. structural isomers A. hydrogen
B. monomers B. peptide
C. polymers C. ionic
D. enantiomers D. glycosidic
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 293 ===
7 • Review Questions 279
5 . Which of the following describes lipids? biochemical characteristic used of microbial
A. a source of nutrients for organisms identification?
B. energy-storage molecules A. poly-β-hydroxybutyrate
C. molecules having structural role in B. small-subunit (16S) rRNA gene
membranes C. carbon utilization
D. molecules that are part of hormones and D. lipid composition
pigments
E. all of the above 11 . Proteomic analysis is a methodology that deals
with which of the following?
6 . Molecules bearing both polar and nonpolar A. the analysis of proteins functioning as
groups are said to be which of the following? enzymes within the cell
A. hydrophilic B. analysis of transport proteins in the cell
B. amphipathic C. the analysis of integral proteins of the cell
C. hydrophobic membrane
D. polyfunctional D. the study of all accumulated proteins of an
organism
7 . Which of the following groups varies among
different amino acids? 12 . Which method involves the generation of gas
A. hydrogen atom phase ions from intact microorganisms?
B. carboxyl group A. FAME
C. R group B. PLFA
D. amino group C. MALDI-TOF
D. Lancefield group testing
8 . The amino acids present in proteins differ in
which of the following? 13 . Which method involves the analysis of
A. size membrane-bound carbohydrates?
B. shape A. FAME
C. side groups B. PLFA
D. all of the above C. MALDI-TOF
D. Lancefield group testing
9 . Which of the following bonds are not involved in
tertiary structure? 14 . Which method involves conversion of a
A. peptide bonds microbe’s lipids to volatile compounds for
B. ionic bonds analysis by gas chromatography?
C. hydrophobic interactions A. FAME
D. hydrogen bonds B. proteomic analysis
C. MALDI-TOF
10 . Which of the following characteristics/ D. Lancefield group testing
compounds is not considered to be a phenotypic
True/False
15 . Aldehydes, amides, carboxylic acids, esters, and 19 . A triglyceride is formed by joining three glycerol
ketones all contain carbonyl groups. molecules to a fatty acid backbone in a
dehydration reaction.
16 . Two molecules containing the same types and
numbers of atoms but different bonding 20 . A change in one amino acid in a protein
sequences are called enantiomers. sequence always results in a loss of function.
17 . Lipids are a naturally occurring group of 21 . MALDI-TOF relies on obtaining a unique mass
substances that are not soluble in water but are spectrum for the bacteria tested and then
freely soluble in organic solvents. checking the acquired mass spectrum against
the spectrum databases registered in the
18 . Fatty acids having no double bonds are called
analysis software to identify the microorganism.
“unsaturated.”
22 . Lancefield group tests can identify microbes
=== PDF PAGE 294 ===
280 7 • Review Questions
using antibodies that specifically bind cell- surface proteins.
Matching
23 . Match each polysaccharide with its description.
___starch C. structural polymer found in
___chitin A. energy storage polymer in cell walls of fungi and
plants exoskeletons of some animals
___glycogen B. structural polymer found in ___cellulose D. energy storage polymer
plants found in animal cells and
bacteria
Fill in the Blank
24 . Waxes contain esters formed from long-chain 26 . The sequence of amino acids in a protein is
__________ and saturated __________, and called its __________.
they may also contain substituted hydrocarbons.
27 . Denaturation implies the loss of the __________
25 . Cholesterol is the most common member of the and __________ structures without the loss of
__________ group, found in animal tissues; it the __________ structure.
has a tetracyclic carbon ring system with a
28 . A FAME analysis involves the conversion of
__________ bond in one of the rings and one
_______ to more volatile _____ for analysis
free __________group.
using ____________.
Short Answer
29 . Why are carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and hydrogen 31 . What are monosaccharides, disaccharides, and
the most abundant elements in living matter polysaccharides?
and, therefore, considered macronutrients?
32 . Describe the structure of a typical phospholipid.
30 . Identify the functional group in each of the Are these molecules polar or nonpolar?
depicted structural formulas.
33 . Compare MALDI-TOF, FAME, and PLFA, and
explain how each technique would be used to
identify pathogens.
Critical Thinking
34 . The structural formula shown corresponds to
penicillin G, a narrow-spectrum antibiotic that is
given intravenously or intramuscularly as a
treatment for several bacterial diseases. The
antibiotic is produced by fungi of the genus
Penicillium. (a) Identify three major functional
groups in this molecule that each comprise two
simpler functional groups. (b) Name the two
simpler functional groups composing each of the
major functional groups identified in (a).
35 . The figure depicts the structural formulas of
glucose, galactose, and fructose. (a) Circle the
functional groups that classify the sugars either an
aldose or a ketose, and identify each sugar as one or
the other. (b) The chemical formula of these
Access for free at openstax.org