=== PDF PAGE 337 ===
CHAPTER 9
Microbial Growth
FIGURE 9.1 Medical devices that are inserted into a patient’s body often become contaminated with a thin biofilm of microorganisms
enmeshed in the sticky material they secrete. The electron micrograph (left) shows the inside walls of an in-dwelling catheter. Arrows
point to the round cells of Staphylococcus aureus bacteria attached to the layers of extracellular substrate. The garbage can (right) served
as a rain collector. The arrow points to a green biofilm on the sides of the container. (credit left: modification of work by Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention; credit right: modification of work by NASA)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
9.1 How Microbes Grow
9.2 Oxygen Requirements for Microbial Growth
9.3 The Effects of pH on Microbial Growth
9.4 Temperature and Microbial Growth
9.5 Other Environmental Conditions that Affect Growth
9.6 Media Used for Bacterial Growth
INTRODUCTION We are all familiar with the slimy layer on a pond surface or that makes rocks slippery. These are
examples of biofilms—microorganisms embedded in thin layers of matrix material (Figure 9.1). Biofilms were long
considered random assemblages of cells and had little attention from researchers. Recently, progress in
visualization and biochemical methods has revealed that biofilms are an organized ecosystem within which many
cells, usually of different species of bacteria, fungi, and algae, interact through cell signaling and coordinated
responses. The biofilm provides a protected environment in harsh conditions and aids colonization by
microorganisms. Biofilms also have clinical importance. They form on medical devices, resist routine cleaning and
sterilization, and cause health-acquired infections. Within the body, biofilms form on the teeth as plaque, in the
lungs of patients with cystic fibrosis, and on the cardiac tissue of patients with endocarditis. The slime layer helps
protect the cells from host immune defenses and antibiotic treatments.
Biofilms don't only exist on Earth. They have been frequent occupants (and problems) on the International Space
Station. Bacterial and fungal biofilms grow on a number of space station objects and within systems. In some cases,
growth has been so significant that hoses and other components had to be completely replaced. While this is
difficult on the ISS, it poses even greater risk for longer-range travel planned for the future. As described later in the
chapter, a group of scientists has devised a method to prevent growth of biofilms through surface preparation:
reducing the ability of the microorganisms to adhere to materials.
Studying biofilms requires new approaches. Because of the cells’ adhesion properties, many of the methods for
culturing and counting cells that are explored in this chapter are not easily applied to biofilms. This is the beginning
of a new era of challenges and rewarding insight into the ways that microorganisms grow and thrive in nature.
=== PDF PAGE 338 ===
324 9 • Microbial Growth
9.1 How Microbes Grow
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define the generation time for growth based on binary fission
• Identify and describe the activities of microorganisms undergoing typical phases of binary fission (simple
cell division) in a growth curve
• Explain several laboratory methods used to determine viable and total cell counts in populations
undergoing exponential growth
• Describe examples of cell division not involving binary fission, such as budding or fragmentation
• Describe the formation and characteristics of biofilms
• Identify health risks associated with biofilms and how they are addressed
• Describe quorum sensing and its role in cell-to-cell communication and coordination of cellular activities
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 1
Jeni, a 24-year-old pregnant woman in her second trimester, visits a clinic with complaints of high fever, 38.9 °C
(102 °F), fatigue, and muscle aches—typical flu-like signs and symptoms. Jeni exercises regularly and follows a
nutritious diet with emphasis on organic foods, including raw milk that she purchases from a local farmer’s
market. All of her immunizations are up to date. However, the health-care provider who sees Jeni is concerned
and orders a blood sample to be sent for testing by the microbiology laboratory.
• Why is the health-care provider concerned about Jeni’s signs and symptoms?
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box
The bacterial cell cycle involves the formation of new cells through the replication of DNA and partitioning of cellular
components into two daughter cells. In prokaryotes, reproduction is always asexual, although extensive genetic
recombination in the form of horizontal gene transfer takes place, as will be explored in a different chapter. Most
bacteria have a single circular chromosome; however, some exceptions exist. For example, Borrelia burgdorferi, the
causative agent of Lyme disease, has a linear chromosome.
Binary Fission
The most common mechanism of cell replication in bacteria is a process called binary fission, which is depicted in
Figure 9.2. Before dividing, the cell grows and increases its number of cellular components. Next, the replication of
DNA starts at a location on the circular chromosome called the origin of replication, where the chromosome is
attached to the inner cell membrane. Replication continues in opposite directions along the chromosome until the
terminus is reached.
The center of the enlarged cell constricts until two daughter cells are formed, each offspring receiving a complete
copy of the parental genome and a division of the cytoplasm (cytokinesis). This process of cytokinesis and cell
division is directed by a protein called FtsZ. FtsZ assembles into a Z ring on the cytoplasmic membrane (Figure 9.3).
The Z ring is anchored by FtsZ-binding proteins and defines the division plane between the two daughter cells.
Additional proteins required for cell division are added to the Z ring to form a structure called the divisome. The
divisome activates to produce a peptidoglycan cell wall and build a septum that divides the two daughter cells. The
daughter cells are separated by the division septum, where all of the cells’ outer layers (the cell wall and outer
membranes, if present) must be remodeled to complete division. For example, we know that specific enzymes break
bonds between the monomers in peptidoglycans and allow addition of new subunits along the division septum.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 339 ===
9.1 • How Microbes Grow 325
FIGURE 9.2 (a) The electron micrograph depicts two cells of Salmonella typhimurium after a binary fission event. (b) Binary fission in
bacteria starts with the replication of DNA as the cell elongates. A division septum forms in the center of the cell. Two daughter cells of
similar size form and separate, each receiving a copy of the original chromosome. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention)
FIGURE 9.3 FtsZ proteins assemble to form a Z ring that is anchored to the plasma membrane. The Z ring pinches the cell envelope to
separate the cytoplasm of the new cells.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What is the name of the protein that assembles into a Z ring to initiate cytokinesis and cell division?
Generation Time
In eukaryotic organisms, the generation time is the time between the same points of the life cycle in two successive
generations. For example, the typical generation time for the human population is 25 years. This definition is not
practical for bacteria, which may reproduce rapidly or remain dormant for thousands of years. In prokaryotes
(Bacteria and Archaea), the generation time is also called the doubling time and is defined as the time it takes for
the population to double through one round of binary fission. Bacterial doubling times vary enormously. Whereas
Escherichia coli can double in as little as 20 minutes under optimal growth conditions in the laboratory, bacteria of
=== PDF PAGE 340 ===
326 9 • Microbial Growth
the same species may need several days to double in especially harsh environments. Most pathogens grow rapidly,
like E. coli, but there are exceptions. For example, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the causative agent of tuberculosis,
has a generation time of between 15 and 20 hours. On the other hand, M. leprae, which causes Hansen’s disease
(leprosy), grows much more slowly, with a doubling time of 14 days.
MICRO CONNECTIONS
Calculating Number of Cells
It is possible to predict the number of cells in a population when they divide by binary fission at a constant rate. As
an example, consider what happens if a single cell divides every 30 minutes for 24 hours. The diagram in Figure 9.4
shows the increase in cell numbers for the first three generations.
The number of cells increases exponentially and can be expressed as 2n, where n is the number of generations. If
cells divide every 30 minutes, after 24 hours, 48 divisions would have taken place. If we apply the formula 2n, where
n is equal to 48, the single cell would give rise to 248 or 281,474,976,710,656 cells at 48 generations (24 hours).
When dealing with such huge numbers, it is more practical to use scientific notation. Therefore, we express the
number of cells as 2.8 × 1014 cells.
In our example, we used one cell as the initial number of cells. For any number of starting cells, the formula is
adapted as follows:
Nn is the number of cells at any generation n, N0 is the initial number of cells, and n is the number of generations.
FIGURE 9.4 The parental cell divides and gives rise to two daughter cells. Each of the daughter cells, in turn, divides, giving a total of four
cells in the second generation and eight cells in the third generation. Each division doubles the number of cells.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• With a doubling time of 30 minutes and a starting population size of 1 × 105 cells, how many cells will be
present after 2 hours, assuming no cell death?
The Growth Curve
Microorganisms grown in closed culture (also known as a batch culture), in which no nutrients are added and most
waste is not removed, follow a reproducible growth pattern referred to as the growth curve. An example of a batch
culture in nature is a pond in which a small number of cells grow in a closed environment. The culture density is
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 341 ===
9.1 • How Microbes Grow 327
defined as the number of cells per unit volume. In a closed environment, the culture density is also a measure of the
number of cells in the population. Infections of the body do not always follow the growth curve, but correlations can
exist depending upon the site and type of infection. When the number of live cells is plotted against time, distinct
phases can be observed in the curve (Figure 9.5).
FIGURE 9.5 The growth curve of a bacterial culture is represented by the logarithm of the number of live cells plotted as a function of time.
The graph can be divided into four phases according to the slope, each of which matches events in the cell. The four phases are lag, log,
stationary, and death.
The Lag Phase
The beginning of the growth curve represents a small number of cells, referred to as an inoculum, that are added to
a fresh culture medium, a nutritional broth that supports growth. The initial phase of the growth curve is called the
lag phase, during which cells are gearing up for the next phase of growth. The number of cells does not change
during the lag phase; however, cells grow larger and are metabolically active, synthesizing proteins needed to grow
within the medium. If any cells were damaged or shocked during the transfer to the new medium, repair takes place
during the lag phase. The duration of the lag phase is determined by many factors, including the species and genetic
make-up of the cells, the composition of the medium, and the size of the original inoculum.
The Log Phase
In the logarithmic (log) growth phase, sometimes called exponential growth phase, the cells are actively dividing
by binary fission and their number increases exponentially. For any given bacterial species, the generation time
under specific growth conditions (nutrients, temperature, pH, and so forth) is genetically determined, and this
generation time is called the intrinsic growth rate. During the log phase, the relationship between time and number
of cells is not linear but exponential; however, the growth curve is often plotted on a semilogarithmic graph, as
shown in Figure 9.6, which gives the appearance of a linear relationship.
=== PDF PAGE 342 ===
328 9 • Microbial Growth
FIGURE 9.6 Both graphs illustrate population growth during the log phase for a bacterial sample with an initial population of one cell and a
doubling time of 1 hour. (a) When plotted on an arithmetic scale, the growth rate resembles a curve. (b) When plotted on a semilogarithmic
scale (meaning the values on the y-axis are logarithmic), the growth rate appears linear.
Cells in the log phase show constant growth rate and uniform metabolic activity. For this reason, cells in the log
phase are preferentially used for industrial applications and research work. The log phase is also the stage where
bacteria are the most susceptible to the action of disinfectants and common antibiotics that affect protein, DNA, and
cell-wall synthesis.
Stationary Phase
As the number of cells increases through the log phase, several factors contribute to a slowing of the growth rate.
Waste products accumulate and nutrients are gradually used up. In addition, gradual depletion of oxygen begins to
limit aerobic cell growth. This combination of unfavorable conditions slows and finally stalls population growth. The
total number of live cells reaches a plateau referred to as the stationary phase (Figure 9.5). In this phase, the
number of new cells created by cell division is now equivalent to the number of cells dying; thus, the total
population of living cells is relatively stagnant. The culture density in a stationary culture is constant. The culture’s
carrying capacity, or maximum culture density, depends on the types of microorganisms in the culture and the
specific conditions of the culture; however, carrying capacity is constant for a given organism grown under the same
conditions.
During the stationary phase, cells switch to a survival mode of metabolism. As growth slows, so too does the
synthesis of peptidoglycans, proteins, and nucleic-acids; thus, stationary cultures are less susceptible to antibiotics
that disrupt these processes. In bacteria capable of producing endospores, many cells undergo sporulation during
the stationary phase. Secondary metabolites, including antibiotics, are synthesized in the stationary phase. In
certain pathogenic bacteria, the stationary phase is also associated with the expression of virulence factors,
products that contribute to a microbe’s ability to survive, reproduce, and cause disease in a host organism. For
example, quorum sensing in Staphylococcus aureus initiates the production of enzymes that can break down human
tissue and cellular debris, clearing the way for bacteria to spread to new tissue where nutrients are more plentiful.
The Death Phase
As a culture medium accumulates toxic waste and nutrients are exhausted, cells die in greater and greater numbers.
Soon, the number of dying cells exceeds the number of dividing cells, leading to an exponential decrease in the
number of cells (Figure 9.5). This is the aptly named death phase, sometimes called the decline phase. Many cells
lyse and release nutrients into the medium, allowing surviving cells to maintain viability and form endospores. A few
cells, the so-called persisters, are characterized by a slow metabolic rate. Persister cells are medically important
because they are associated with certain chronic infections, such as tuberculosis, that do not respond to antibiotic
treatment.
Sustaining Microbial Growth
The growth pattern shown in Figure 9.5 takes place in a closed environment; nutrients are not added and waste and
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 343 ===
9.1 • How Microbes Grow 329
dead cells are not removed. In many cases, though, it is advantageous to maintain cells in the logarithmic phase of
growth. One example is in industries that harvest microbial products. A chemostat (Figure 9.7) is used to maintain a
continuous culture in which nutrients are supplied at a steady rate. A controlled amount of air is mixed in for aerobic
processes. Bacterial suspension is removed at the same rate as nutrients flow in to maintain an optimal growth
environment.
FIGURE 9.7 A chemostat is a culture vessel fitted with an opening to add nutrients (feed) and an outlet to remove contents (effluent),
effectively diluting toxic wastes and dead cells. The addition and removal of fluids is adjusted to maintain the culture in the logarithmic
phase of growth. If aerobic bacteria are grown, suitable oxygen levels are maintained.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• During which phase does growth occur at the fastest rate?
• Name two factors that limit microbial growth.
Measurement of Bacterial Growth
Estimating the number of bacterial cells in a sample, known as a bacterial count, is a common task performed by
microbiologists. The number of bacteria in a clinical sample serves as an indication of the extent of an infection.
Quality control of drinking water, food, medication, and even cosmetics relies on estimates of bacterial counts to
detect contamination and prevent the spread of disease. Two major approaches are used to measure cell number.
The direct methods involve counting cells, whereas the indirect methods depend on the measurement of cell
presence or activity without actually counting individual cells. Both direct and indirect methods have advantages
and disadvantages for specific applications.
Direct Cell Count
Direct cell count refers to counting the cells in a liquid culture or colonies on a plate. It is a direct way of estimating
how many organisms are present in a sample. Let’s look first at a simple and fast method that requires only a
specialized slide and a compound microscope.
The simplest way to count bacteria is called the direct microscopic cell count, which involves transferring a known
volume of a culture to a calibrated slide and counting the cells under a light microscope. The calibrated slide is
called a Petroff-Hausser chamber (Figure 9.8) and is similar to a hemocytometer used to count red blood cells. The
central area of the counting chamber is etched into squares of various sizes. A sample of the culture suspension is
added to the chamber under a coverslip that is placed at a specific height from the surface of the grid. It is possible
to estimate the concentration of cells in the original sample by counting individual cells in a number of squares and
determining the volume of the sample observed. The area of the squares and the height at which the coverslip is
positioned are specified for the chamber. The concentration must be corrected for dilution if the sample was diluted
before enumeration.
=== PDF PAGE 344 ===
330 9 • Microbial Growth
FIGURE 9.8 (a) A Petroff-Hausser chamber is a special slide designed for counting the bacterial cells in a measured volume of a sample. A
grid is etched on the slide to facilitate precision in counting. (b) This diagram illustrates the grid of a Petroff-Hausser chamber, which is
made up of squares of known areas. The enlarged view shows the square within which bacteria (red cells) are counted. If the coverslip is
0.2 mm above the grid and the square has an area of 0.04 mm2, then the volume is 0.008 mm3, or 0.000008 mL. Since there are 10 cells
inside the square, the density of bacteria is 10 cells/0.000008 mL, which equates to 1,250,000 cells/mL. (credit a: modification of work by
Jeffrey M. Vinocur)
Cells in several small squares must be counted and the average taken to obtain a reliable measurement. The
advantages of the chamber are that the method is easy to use, relatively fast, and inexpensive. On the downside, the
counting chamber does not work well with dilute cultures because there may not be enough cells to count.
Using a counting chamber does not necessarily yield an accurate count of the number of live cells because it is not
always possible to distinguish between live cells, dead cells, and debris of the same size under the microscope.
However, newly developed fluorescence staining techniques make it possible to distinguish viable and dead
bacteria. These viability stains (or live stains) bind to nucleic acids, but the primary and secondary stains differ in
their ability to cross the cytoplasmic membrane. The primary stain, which fluoresces green, can penetrate intact
cytoplasmic membranes, staining both live and dead cells. The secondary stain, which fluoresces red, can stain a
cell only if the cytoplasmic membrane is considerably damaged. Thus, live cells fluoresce green because they only
absorb the green stain, whereas dead cells appear red because the red stain displaces the green stain on their
nucleic acids (Figure 9.9).
FIGURE 9.9 Fluorescence staining can be used to differentiate between viable and dead bacterial cells in a sample for purposes of
counting. Viable cells are stained green, whereas dead cells are stained red. (credit: modification of work by Emerson J, Adams R,
Bentancourt Román C, Brooks B, Coil D, Dahlhousen K, Ganz H, et al.)
Another technique uses an electronic cell counting device (Coulter counter) to detect and count the changes in
electrical resistance in a saline solution. A glass tube with a small opening is immersed in an electrolyte solution. A
first electrode is suspended in the glass tube. A second electrode is located outside of the tube. As cells are drawn
through the small aperture in the glass tube, they briefly change the resistance measured between the two
electrodes and the change is recorded by an electronic sensor (Figure 9.10); each resistance change represents a
cell. The method is rapid and accurate within a range of concentrations; however, if the culture is too concentrated,
more than one cell may pass through the aperture at any given time and skew the results. This method also does not
differentiate between live and dead cells.
Direct counts provide an estimate of the total number of cells in a sample. However, in many situations, it is
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 345 ===
9.1 • How Microbes Grow 331
important to know the number of live, or viable, cells. Counts of live cells are needed when assessing the extent of
an infection, the effectiveness of antimicrobial compounds and medication, or contamination of food and water.
FIGURE 9.10 A Coulter counter is an electronic device that counts cells. It measures the change in resistance in an electrolyte solution that
takes place when a cell passes through a small opening in the inside container wall. A detector automatically counts the number of cells
passing through the opening. (credit b: modification of work by National Institutes of Health)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Why would you count the number of cells in more than one square in the Petroff-Hausser chamber to estimate
cell numbers?
• In the viability staining method, why do dead cells appear red?
Plate Count
The viable plate count, or simply plate count, is a count of viable or live cells. It is based on the principle that viable
cells replicate and give rise to visible colonies when incubated under suitable conditions for the specimen. The
results are usually expressed as colony-forming units per milliliter (CFU/mL) rather than cells per milliliter because
more than one cell may have landed on the same spot to give rise to a single colony. Furthermore, samples of
bacteria that grow in clusters or chains are difficult to disperse and a single colony may represent several cells.
Some cells are described as viable but nonculturable and will not form colonies on solid media. For all these
reasons, the viable plate count is considered a low estimate of the actual number of live cells. These limitations do
not detract from the usefulness of the method, which provides estimates of live bacterial numbers.
Microbiologists typically count plates with 30–300 colonies. Samples with too few colonies (<30) do not give
statistically reliable numbers, and overcrowded plates (>300 colonies) make it difficult to accurately count
individual colonies. Also, counts in this range minimize occurrences of more than one bacterial cell forming a single
colony. Thus, the calculated CFU is closer to the true number of live bacteria in the population.
There are two common approaches to inoculating plates for viable counts: the pour plate and the spread plate
methods. Although the final inoculation procedure differs between these two methods, they both start with a serial
dilution of the culture.
Serial Dilution
The serial dilution of a culture is an important first step before proceeding to either the pour plate or spread plate
method. The goal of the serial dilution process is to obtain plates with CFUs in the range of 30–300, and the process
usually involves several dilutions in multiples of 10 to simplify calculation. The number of serial dilutions is chosen
according to a preliminary estimate of the culture density. Figure 9.11 illustrates the serial dilution method.
A fixed volume of the original culture, 1.0 mL, is added to and thoroughly mixed with the first dilution tube solution,
=== PDF PAGE 346 ===
332 9 • Microbial Growth
which contains 9.0 mL of sterile broth. This step represents a dilution factor of 10, or 1:10, compared with the
original culture. From this first dilution, the same volume, 1.0 mL, is withdrawn and mixed with a fresh tube of 9.0
mL of dilution solution. The dilution factor is now 1:100 compared with the original culture. This process continues
until a series of dilutions is produced that will bracket the desired cell concentration for accurate counting. From
each tube, a sample is plated on solid medium using either the pour plate method (Figure 9.12) or the spread plate
method (Figure 9.13). The plates are incubated until colonies appear. Two to three plates are usually prepared from
each dilution and the numbers of colonies counted on each plate are averaged. In all cases, thorough mixing of
samples with the dilution medium (to ensure the cell distribution in the tube is random) is paramount to obtaining
reliable results.
FIGURE 9.11 Serial dilution involves diluting a fixed volume of cells mixed with dilution solution using the previous dilution as an inoculum.
The result is dilution of the original culture by an exponentially growing factor. (credit: modification of work by “Leberechtc”/Wikimedia
Commons)
The dilution factor is used to calculate the number of cells in the original cell culture. In our example, an average of
50 colonies was counted on the plates obtained from the 1:10,000 dilution. Because only 0.1 mL of suspension was
pipetted on the plate, the multiplier required to reconstitute the original concentration is 10 × 10,000. The number
of CFU per mL is equal to 50 × 10 × 10,000 = 5,000,000. The number of bacteria in the culture is estimated as 5
million cells/mL. The colony count obtained from the 1:1000 dilution was 389, well below the expected 500 for a
10-fold difference in dilutions. This highlights the issue of inaccuracy when colony counts are greater than 300 and
more than one bacterial cell grows into a single colony.
FIGURE 9.12 In the pour plate method of cell counting, the sample is mixed in liquid warm agar (45–50 °C) poured into a sterile Petri dish
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 347 ===
9.1 • How Microbes Grow 333
and further mixed by swirling. This process is repeated for each serial dilution prepared. The resulting colonies are counted and provide an
estimate of the number of cells in the original volume sampled.
FIGURE 9.13 In the spread plate method of cell counting, the sample is poured onto solid agar and then spread using a sterile spreader.
This process is repeated for each serial dilution prepared. The resulting colonies are counted and provide an estimate of the number of cells
in the original volume samples.
A very dilute sample—drinking water, for example—may not contain enough organisms to use either of the plate
count methods described. In such cases, the original sample must be concentrated rather than diluted before
plating. This can be accomplished using a modification of the plate count technique called the membrane filtration
technique. Known volumes are vacuum-filtered aseptically through a membrane with a pore size small enough to
trap microorganisms. The membrane is transferred to a Petri plate containing an appropriate growth medium.
Colonies are counted after incubation. Calculation of the cell density is made by dividing the cell count by the
volume of filtered liquid.
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch this video (https://openstax.org/l/22serdilpltcvid) for demonstrations of serial dilutions and spread plate
techniques.
The Most Probable Number
The number of microorganisms in dilute samples is usually too low to be detected by the plate count methods
described thus far. For these specimens, microbiologists routinely use the most probable number (MPN) method, a
statistical procedure for estimating of the number of viable microorganisms in a sample. Often used for water and
food samples, the MPN method evaluates detectable growth by observing changes in turbidity or color due to
metabolic activity.
A typical application of MPN method is the estimation of the number of coliforms in a sample of pond water.
Coliforms are gram-negative rod bacteria that ferment lactose. The presence of coliforms in water is considered a
sign of contamination by fecal matter. For the method illustrated in Figure 9.14, a series of three dilutions of the
water sample is tested by inoculating five lactose broth tubes with 10 mL of sample, five lactose broth tubes with 1
mL of sample, and five lactose broth tubes with 0.1 mL of sample. The lactose broth tubes contain a pH indicator
that changes color from red to yellow when the lactose is fermented. After inoculation and incubation, the tubes are
examined for an indication of coliform growth by a color change in media from red to yellow. The first set of tubes
(10-mL sample) showed growth in all the tubes; the second set of tubes (1 mL) showed growth in two tubes out of
five; in the third set of tubes, no growth is observed in any of the tubes (0.1-mL dilution). The numbers 5, 2, and 0
are compared with Figure B1 in Appendix B, which has been constructed using a probability model of the sampling
procedure. From our reading of the table, we conclude that 49 is the most probable number of bacteria per 100 mL
of pond water.
=== PDF PAGE 348 ===
334 9 • Microbial Growth
FIGURE 9.14 In the most probable number method, sets of five lactose broth tubes are inoculated with three different volumes of pond
water: 10 mL, 1 mL, and 0.1mL. Bacterial growth is assessed through a change in the color of the broth from red to yellow as lactose is
fermented.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What is a colony-forming unit?
• What two methods are frequently used to estimate bacterial numbers in water samples?
Indirect Cell Counts
Besides direct methods of counting cells, other methods, based on an indirect detection of cell density, are
commonly used to estimate and compare cell densities in a culture. The foremost approach is to measure the
turbidity (cloudiness) of a sample of bacteria in a liquid suspension. The laboratory instrument used to measure
turbidity is called a spectrophotometer (Figure 9.15). In a spectrophotometer, a light beam is transmitted through a
bacterial suspension, the light passing through the suspension is measured by a detector, and the amount of light
passing through the sample and reaching the detector is converted to either percent transmission or a logarithmic
value called absorbance (optical density). As the numbers of bacteria in a suspension increase, the turbidity also
increases and causes less light to reach the detector. The decrease in light passing through the sample and reaching
the detector is associated with a decrease in percent transmission and increase in absorbance measured by the
spectrophotometer.
Measuring turbidity is a fast method to estimate cell density as long as there are enough cells in a sample to
produce turbidity. It is possible to correlate turbidity readings to the actual number of cells by performing a viable
plate count of samples taken from cultures having a range of absorbance values. Using these values, a calibration
curve is generated by plotting turbidity as a function of cell density. Once the calibration curve has been produced, it
can be used to estimate cell counts for all samples obtained or cultured under similar conditions and with densities
within the range of values used to construct the curve.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 349 ===
9.1 • How Microbes Grow 335
FIGURE 9.15 (a) A spectrophotometer is commonly used to measure the turbidity of a bacterial cell suspension as an indirect measure of
cell density. (b) A spectrophotometer works by splitting white light from a source into a spectrum. The spectrophotometer allows choice of
the wavelength of light to use for the measurement. The optical density (turbidity) of the sample will depend on the wavelength, so once
one wavelength is chosen, it must be used consistently. The filtered light passes through the sample (or a control with only medium) and
the light intensity is measured by a detector. The light passing into a suspension of bacteria is scattered by the cells in such a way that
some fraction of it never reaches the detector. This scattering happens to a far lesser degree in the control tube with only the medium.
(credit a: modification of work by Hwang HS, Kim MS; credit b “test tube photos”: modification of work by Suzanne Wakim)
Measuring dry weight of a culture sample is another indirect method of evaluating culture density without directly
measuring cell counts. The cell suspension used for weighing must be concentrated by filtration or centrifugation,
washed, and then dried before the measurements are taken. The degree of drying must be standardized to account
for residual water content. This method is especially useful for filamentous microorganisms, which are difficult to
enumerate by direct or viable plate count.
As we have seen, methods to estimate viable cell numbers can be labor intensive and take time because cells must
be grown. Recently, indirect ways of measuring live cells have been developed that are both fast and easy to
implement. These methods measure cell activity by following the production of metabolic products or
disappearance of reactants. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) formation, biosynthesis of proteins and nucleic acids,
and consumption of oxygen can all be monitored to estimate the number of cells.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What is the purpose of a calibration curve when estimating cell count from turbidity measurements?
• What are the newer indirect methods of counting live cells?
Alternative Patterns of Cell Division
Binary fission is the most common pattern of cell division in prokaryotes, but it is not the only one. Other
mechanisms usually involve asymmetrical division (as in budding) or production of spores in aerial filaments.
In some cyanobacteria, many nucleoids may accumulate in an enlarged round cell or along a filament, leading to the
generation of many new cells at once. The new cells often split from the parent filament and float away in a process
called fragmentation (Figure 9.16). Fragmentation is commonly observed in the Actinomycetes, a group of gram-
positive, anaerobic bacteria commonly found in soil. Another curious example of cell division in prokaryotes,
reminiscent of live birth in animals, is exhibited by the giant bacterium Epulopiscium. Several daughter cells grow
fully in the parent cell, which eventually disintegrates, releasing the new cells to the environment. Other species
may form a long narrow extension at one pole in a process called budding. The tip of the extension swells and forms
a smaller cell, the bud that eventually detaches from the parent cell. Budding is most common in yeast (Figure
9.16), but it is also observed in prosthecate bacteria and some cyanobacteria.
=== PDF PAGE 350 ===
336 9 • Microbial Growth
FIGURE 9.16 (a) Filamentous cyanobacteria, like those pictured here, replicate by fragmentation. (b) In this electron micrograph, cells of
the bacterium Gemmata obscuriglobus are budding. The larger cell is the mother cell. Labels indicate the nucleoids (N) and the still-forming
nuclear envelope (NE) of the daughter cell. Gemmata obscuriglobus is a rare case of a prokaryote with a nuclear envelope-like structure.
(credit a: modification of work by CSIRO; credit b: modification of work by Kuo-Chang Lee, Rick I Webb and John A Fuerst)
The soil bacteria Actinomyces grow in long filaments divided by septa, similar to the mycelia seen in fungi, resulting
in long cells with multiple nucleoids. Environmental signals, probably related to low nutrient availability, lead to the
formation of aerial filaments. Within these aerial filaments, elongated cells divide simultaneously. The new cells,
which contain a single nucleoid, develop into spores that give rise to new colonies.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Identify at least one difference between fragmentation and budding.
Biofilms
In nature, microorganisms grow mainly in biofilms, complex and dynamic ecosystems that form on a variety of
environmental surfaces, from industrial conduits and water treatment pipelines to rocks in river beds. Biofilms are
not restricted to solid surface substrates, however. Almost any surface in a liquid environment containing some
minimal nutrients will eventually develop a biofilm. Microbial mats that float on water, for example, are biofilms that
contain large populations of photosynthetic microorganisms. Biofilms found in the human mouth may contain
hundreds of bacterial species. Regardless of the environment where they occur, biofilms are not random collections
of microorganisms; rather, they are highly structured communities that provide a selective advantage to their
constituent microorganisms.
Biofilm Structure
Observations using confocal microscopy have shown that environmental conditions influence the overall structure
of biofilms. Filamentous biofilms called streamers form in rapidly flowing water, such as freshwater streams, eddies,
and specially designed laboratory flow cells that replicate growth conditions in fast-moving fluids. The streamers are
anchored to the substrate by a “head” and the “tail” floats downstream in the current. In still or slow-moving water,
biofilms mainly assume a mushroom-like shape. The structure of biofilms may also change with other
environmental conditions such as nutrient availability.
Detailed observations of biofilms under confocal laser and scanning electron microscopes reveal clusters of
microorganisms embedded in a matrix interspersed with open water channels. The extracellular matrix consists of
extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) secreted by the organisms in the biofilm. The extracellular matrix
represents a large fraction of the biofilm, accounting for 50%–90% of the total dry mass. The properties of the EPS
vary according to the resident organisms and environmental conditions.
EPS is a hydrated gel composed primarily of polysaccharides and containing other macromolecules such as
proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids. It plays a key role in maintaining the integrity and function of the biofilm.
Channels in the EPS allow movement of nutrients, waste, and gases throughout the biofilm. This keeps the cells
hydrated, preventing desiccation. EPS also shelters organisms in the biofilm from predation by other microbes or
cells (e.g., protozoans, white blood cells in the human body).
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 351 ===
9.1 • How Microbes Grow 337
Biofilm Formation
Free-floating microbial cells that live in an aquatic environment are called planktonic cells. The formation of a
biofilm essentially involves the attachment of planktonic cells to a substrate, where they become sessile (attached
to a surface). This occurs in stages, as depicted in Figure 9.17. The first stage involves the attachment of planktonic
cells to a surface coated with a conditioning film of organic material. At this point, attachment to the substrate is
reversible, but as cells express new phenotypes that facilitate the formation of EPS, they transition from a
planktonic to a sessile lifestyle. The biofilm develops characteristic structures, including an extensive matrix and
water channels. Appendages such as fimbriae, pili, and flagella interact with the EPS, and microscopy and genetic
analysis suggest that such structures are required for the establishment of a mature biofilm. In the last stage of the
biofilm life cycle, cells on the periphery of the biofilm revert to a planktonic lifestyle, sloughing off the mature biofilm
to colonize new sites. This stage is referred to as dispersal.
FIGURE 9.17 Stages in the formation and life cycle of a biofilm. (credit: modification of work by Public Library of Science and American
Society for Microbiology)
Within a biofilm, different species of microorganisms establish metabolic collaborations in which the waste product
of one organism becomes the nutrient for another. For example, aerobic microorganisms consume oxygen, creating
anaerobic regions that promote the growth of anaerobes. This occurs in many polymicrobial infections that involve
both aerobic and anaerobic pathogens.
The mechanism by which cells in a biofilm coordinate their activities in response to environmental stimuli is called
quorum sensing. Quorum sensing—which can occur between cells of different species within a biofilm—enables
microorganisms to detect their cell density through the release and binding of small, diffusible molecules called
autoinducers. When the cell population reaches a critical threshold (a quorum), these autoinducers initiate a
cascade of reactions that activate genes associated with cellular functions that are beneficial only when the
population reaches a critical density. For example, in some pathogens, synthesis of virulence factors only begins
when enough cells are present to overwhelm the immune defenses of the host. Although mostly studied in bacterial
populations, quorum sensing takes place between bacteria and eukaryotes and between eukaryotic cells such as
the fungus Candida albicans, a common member of the human microbiota that can cause infections in
immunocompromised individuals.
The signaling molecules in quorum sensing belong to two major classes. Gram-negative bacteria communicate
mainly using N-acylated homoserine lactones, whereas gram-positive bacteria mostly use small peptides (Figure
9.18). In all cases, the first step in quorum sensing consists of the binding of the autoinducer to its specific receptor
only when a threshold concentration of signaling molecules is reached. Once binding to the receptor takes place, a
cascade of signaling events leads to changes in gene expression. The result is the activation of biological responses
=== PDF PAGE 352 ===
338 9 • Microbial Growth
linked to quorum sensing, notably an increase in the production of signaling molecules themselves, hence the term
autoinducer.
FIGURE 9.18 Short peptides in gram-positive bacteria and N-acetylated homoserine lactones in gram-negative bacteria act as
autoinducers in quorum sensing and mediate the coordinated response of bacterial cells. The R side chain of the N-acetylated homoserine
lactone is specific for the species of gram-negative bacteria. Some secreted homoserine lactones are recognized by more than one species.
Biofilms and Human Health
The human body harbors many types of biofilms, some beneficial and some harmful. For example, the layers of
normal microbiota lining the intestinal and respiratory mucosa play a role in warding off infections by pathogens.
However, other biofilms in the body can have a detrimental effect on health. For example, the plaque that forms on
teeth is a biofilm that can contribute to dental and periodontal disease. Biofilms can also form in wounds,
sometimes causing serious infections that can spread. The bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa often colonizes
biofilms in the airways of patients with cystic fibrosis, causing chronic and sometimes fatal infections of the lungs.
Biofilms can also form on medical devices used in or on the body, causing infections in patients with in-dwelling
catheters, artificial joints, or contact lenses.
Pathogens embedded within biofilms exhibit a higher resistance to antibiotics than their free-floating counterparts.
Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain why. Cells in the deep layers of a biofilm are metabolically
inactive and may be less susceptible to the action of antibiotics that disrupt metabolic activities. The EPS may also
slow the diffusion of antibiotics and antiseptics, preventing them from reaching cells in the deeper layers of the
biofilm. Phenotypic changes may also contribute to the increased resistance exhibited by bacterial cells in biofilms.
For example, the increased production of efflux pumps, membrane-embedded proteins that actively extrude
antibiotics out of bacterial cells, have been shown to be an important mechanism of antibiotic resistance among
biofilm-associated bacteria. Finally, biofilms provide an ideal environment for the exchange of extrachromosomal
DNA, which often includes genes that confer antibiotic resistance.
Biofilms forming on equipment such as filtration systems can compromise their performance and cause health risks.
Components of CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure) machines, which are used to help people with sleep
apnea, must be replaced periodically because of biofilm buildup. On the International Space Station, biofilms clog
hoses and other portions of water reclamation and filtration systems -- critical elements to long-term survival in
space. After years of effort, a 2023 discovery has significant implications for space travel and dwelling.
Previous approaches to prevent biofilm build-up included treating surfaces with anti-bacterial substances. But
researchers Pamela Flores at University of Colorado and Samantha McBride of MIT described in a 2023 paper, these
often failed when a layer of dead biofilm cells forms and becomes an anchor point for subsequent biofilms to grow.
Furthermore, rapid microbial adaptation leads to resistant strains, which may lead to even greater risks for crew and
equipment. So, instead of killing microorganisms, McBride and Flores -- working with Kripa Varanasi (MIT), Luis Zea
(U. of Colorado), and Jonathan Galazko (NASA) -- treated surfaces with a layer of lubricant, which was infused into
the tiny crevices of the surface and held there by capillary action. Experiments on Earth and on the ISS showed that
the lubrication was effective at preventing biofilm growth because it eliminated microorganism adhesion. Beyond
1
space exploration applications, the approach may be used in medical and other devices.
1 Flores, P., McBride, S.A., Galazka, J.M. et al. (2023). Biofilm formation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in spaceflight is minimized on
lubricant impregnated surfaces. Nature Microgravity 9, 66.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 353 ===
9.2 • Oxygen Requirements for Microbial Growth 339
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What is the matrix of a biofilm composed of?
• What is the role of quorum sensing in a biofilm?
9.2 Oxygen Requirements for Microbial Growth
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Interpret visual data demonstrating minimum, optimum, and maximum oxygen or carbon dioxide
requirements for growth
• Identify and describe different categories of microbes with requirements for growth with or without
oxygen: obligate aerobe, obligate anaerobe, facultative anaerobe, aerotolerant anaerobe, microaerophile,
and capnophile
• Give examples of microorganisms for each category of growth requirements
Ask most people “What are the major requirements for life?” and the answers are likely to include water and
oxygen. Few would argue about the need for water, but what about oxygen? Can there be life without oxygen?
The answer is that molecular oxygen (O2) is not always needed. The earliest signs of life are dated to a period when
conditions on earth were highly reducing and free oxygen gas was essentially nonexistent. Only after cyanobacteria
started releasing oxygen as a byproduct of photosynthesis and the capacity of iron in the oceans for taking up
oxygen was exhausted did oxygen levels increase in the atmosphere. This event, often referred to as the Great
Oxygenation Event or the Oxygen Revolution, caused a massive extinction. Most organisms could not survive the
powerful oxidative properties of reactive oxygen species (ROS), highly unstable ions and molecules derived from
partial reduction of oxygen that can damage virtually any macromolecule or structure with which they come in
contact. Singlet oxygen (O2•), superoxide peroxides (H2O2), hydroxyl radical (OH•), and hypochlorite ion
(OCl−), the active ingredient of household bleach, are all examples of ROS. The organisms that were able to detoxify
reactive oxygen species harnessed the high electronegativity of oxygen to produce free energy for their metabolism
and thrived in the new environment.
Oxygen Requirements of Microorganisms
Many ecosystems are still free of molecular oxygen. Some are found in extreme locations, such as deep in the ocean
or in earth’s crust; others are part of our everyday landscape, such as marshes, bogs, and sewers. Within the bodies
of humans and other animals, regions with little or no oxygen provide an anaerobic environment for microorganisms.
(Figure 9.19).
FIGURE 9.19 Anaerobic environments are still common on earth. They include environments like (a) a bog where undisturbed dense
sediments are virtually devoid of oxygen, and (b) the rumen (the first compartment of a cow’s stomach), which provides an oxygen-free
incubator for methanogens and other obligate anaerobic bacteria. (credit a: modification of work by National Park Service; credit b:
modification of work by US Department of Agriculture)
We can easily observe different requirements for molecular oxygen by growing bacteria in thioglycolate tube
cultures. A test-tube culture starts with autoclaved thioglycolate medium containing a low percentage of agar to
=== PDF PAGE 354 ===
340 9 • Microbial Growth
allow motile bacteria to move throughout the medium. Thioglycolate has strong reducing properties and autoclaving
flushes out most of the oxygen. The tubes are inoculated with the bacterial cultures to be tested and incubated at an
appropriate temperature. Over time, oxygen slowly diffuses throughout the thioglycolate tube culture from the top.
Bacterial density increases in the area where oxygen concentration is best suited for the growth of that particular
organism.
The growth of bacteria with varying oxygen requirements in thioglycolate tubes is illustrated in Figure 9.20. In tube
A, all the growth is seen at the top of the tube. The bacteria are obligate (strict) aerobes that cannot grow without
an abundant supply of oxygen. Tube B looks like the opposite of tube A. Bacteria grow at the bottom of tube B.
Those are obligate anaerobes, which are killed by oxygen. Tube C shows heavy growth at the top of the tube and
growth throughout the tube, a typical result with facultative anaerobes. Facultative anaerobes are organisms that
thrive in the presence of oxygen but also grow in its absence by relying on fermentation or anaerobic respiration, if
there is a suitable electron acceptor other than oxygen and the organism is able to perform anaerobic respiration.
The aerotolerant anaerobes in tube D are indifferent to the presence of oxygen. They do not use oxygen because
they usually have a fermentative metabolism, but they are not harmed by the presence of oxygen as obligate
anaerobes are. Tube E on the right shows a “Goldilocks” culture. The oxygen level has to be just right for growth, not
too much and not too little. These microaerophiles are bacteria that require a minimum level of oxygen for growth,
about 1%–10%, well below the 21% found in the atmosphere.
Examples of obligate aerobes are Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the causative agent of tuberculosis and Micrococcus
luteus, a gram-positive bacterium that colonizes the skin. Neisseria meningitidis, the causative agent of severe
bacterial meningitis, and N. gonorrhoeae, the causative agent of sexually transmitted gonorrhea, are also obligate
aerobes.
FIGURE 9.20 Diagram of bacterial cell distribution in thioglycolate tubes.
Many obligate anaerobes are found in the environment where anaerobic conditions exist, such as in deep sediments
of soil, still waters, and at the bottom of the deep ocean where there is no photosynthetic life. Anaerobic conditions
also exist naturally in the intestinal tract of animals. Obligate anaerobes, mainly Bacteroidetes, represent a large
fraction of the microbes in the human gut. Transient anaerobic conditions exist when tissues are not supplied with
blood circulation; they die and become an ideal breeding ground for obligate anaerobes. Another type of obligate
anaerobe encountered in the human body is the gram-positive, rod-shaped Clostridioides and Clostridium spp. Their
ability to form endospores allows them to survive in the presence of oxygen. One of the major causes of health-
acquired infections is C. difficile, known as C. diff. Prolonged use of antibiotics for other infections increases the
probability of a patient developing a secondary C. difficile infection. Antibiotic treatment disrupts the balance of
microorganisms in the intestine and allows the colonization of the gut by Clostridioides difficile, causing a significant
inflammation of the colon.
Other clostridia responsible for serious infections include C. tetani, the agent of tetanus, and C. perfringens, which
causes gas gangrene. In both cases, the infection starts in necrotic tissue (dead tissue that is not supplied with
oxygen by blood circulation). This is the reason that deep puncture wounds are associated with tetanus. When
tissue death is accompanied by lack of circulation, gangrene is always a danger.
The study of obligate anaerobes requires special equipment. Obligate anaerobic bacteria must be grown under
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 355 ===
9.2 • Oxygen Requirements for Microbial Growth 341
conditions devoid of oxygen. The most common approach is culture in an anaerobic jar (Figure 9.21). Anaerobic jars
include chemical packs that remove oxygen and release carbon dioxide (CO2). An anaerobic chamber is an
enclosed box from which all oxygen is removed. Gloves sealed to openings in the box allow handling of the cultures
without exposing the culture to air (Figure 9.21).
FIGURE 9.21 (a) An anaerobic jar is pictured that is holding nine Petri plates supporting cultures. (b) Openings in the side of an anaerobic
box are sealed by glove-like sleeves that allow for the handling of cultures inside the box. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by NIST)
Staphylococci and Enterobacteriaceae are examples of facultative anaerobes. Staphylococci are found on the skin
and upper respiratory tract. Enterobacteriaceae are found primarily in the gut and upper respiratory tract but can
sometimes spread to the urinary tract, where they are capable of causing infections. It is not unusual to see mixed
bacterial infections in which the facultative anaerobes use up the oxygen, creating an environment for the obligate
anaerobes to flourish.
Examples of aerotolerant anaerobes include lactobacilli and streptococci, both found in the oral microbiota.
Campylobacter jejuni, which causes gastrointestinal infections, is an example of a microaerophile and is grown
under low-oxygen conditions.
The optimum oxygen concentration, as the name implies, is the ideal concentration of oxygen for a particular
microorganism. The lowest concentration of oxygen that allows growth is called the minimum permissive oxygen
concentration. The highest tolerated concentration of oxygen is the maximum permissive oxygen concentration.
The organism will not grow outside the range of oxygen levels found between the minimum and maximum
permissive oxygen concentrations.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Would you expect the oldest bacterial lineages to be aerobic or anaerobic?
• Which bacteria grow at the top of a thioglycolate tube, and which grow at the bottom of the tube?
CASE IN POINT
An Unwelcome Anaerobe
Charles is a retired bus driver who developed type 2 diabetes over 10 years ago. Since his retirement, his
lifestyle has become very sedentary and he has put on a substantial amount of weight. Although he has felt
tingling and numbness in his left foot for a while, he has not been worried because he thought his foot was
simply “falling asleep.” Recently, a scratch on his foot does not seem to be healing and is becoming increasingly
ugly. Because the sore did not bother him much, Charles figured it could not be serious until his daughter
noticed a purplish discoloration spreading on the skin and oozing (Figure 9.22). When he was finally seen by his
physician, Charles was rushed to the operating room. His open sore, or ulcer, is the result of a diabetic foot.
The concern here is that gas gangrene may have taken hold in the dead tissue. The most likely agent of gas
gangrene is Clostridium perfringens, an endospore-forming, gram-positive bacterium. It is an obligate anaerobe
=== PDF PAGE 356 ===
342 9 • Microbial Growth
that grows in tissue devoid of oxygen. Since dead tissue is no longer supplied with oxygen by the circulatory
system, the dead tissue provides pockets of ideal environment for the growth of C. perfringens.
A surgeon examines the ulcer and radiographs of Charles’s foot and determines that the bone is not yet infected.
The wound will have to be surgically debrided (debridement refers to the removal of dead and infected tissue)
and a sample sent for microbiological lab analysis, but Charles will not have to have his foot amputated. Many
diabetic patients are not so lucky. In 2008, nearly 70,000 diabetic patients in the United States lost a foot or
2
limb to amputation, according to statistics from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
• Which growth conditions would you recommend for the detection of C. perfringens?
FIGURE 9.22 This clinical photo depicts ulcers on the foot of a diabetic patient. Dead tissue accumulating in ulcers can provide an ideal
growth environment for the anaerobe C. perfringens, a causative agent of gas gangrene. (Credit: Phalinn Ooi / Wikimedia Commons
(CC-BY))
Detoxification of Reactive Oxygen Species
Aerobic respiration constantly generates reactive oxygen species (ROS), byproducts that must be detoxified. Even
organisms that do not use aerobic respiration need some way to break down some of the ROS that may form from
atmospheric oxygen. Three main enzymes break down those toxic byproducts: superoxide dismutase, peroxidase,
and catalase. Each one catalyzes a different reaction. Reactions of type seen in Reaction 1 are catalyzed by
peroxidases.
In these reactions, an electron donor (reduced compound; e.g., reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide [NADH])
oxidizes hydrogen peroxide, or other peroxides, to water. The enzymes play an important role by limiting the
damage caused by peroxidation of membrane lipids. Reaction 2 is mediated by the enzyme superoxide dismutase
(SOD) and breaks down the powerful superoxide anions generated by aerobic metabolism:
The enzyme catalase converts hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen as shown in Reaction 3.
Obligate anaerobes usually lack all three enzymes. Aerotolerant anaerobes do have SOD but no catalase. Reaction
3, shown occurring in Figure 9.23, is the basis of a useful and rapid test to distinguish streptococci, which are
aerotolerant and do not possess catalase, from staphylococci, which are facultative anaerobes. A sample of culture
rapidly mixed in a drop of 3% hydrogen peroxide will release bubbles if the culture is catalase positive.
2 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Living With Diabetes: Keep Your Feet Healthy.” http://www.cdc.gov/Features/
DiabetesFootHealth/
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 357 ===
9.2 • Oxygen Requirements for Microbial Growth 343
FIGURE 9.23 The catalase test detects the presence of the enzyme catalase by noting whether bubbles are released when hydrogen
peroxide is added to a culture sample. Compare the positive result (right) with the negative result (left). (credit: Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention)
Bacteria that grow best in a higher concentration of CO2 and a lower concentration of oxygen than present in the
atmosphere are called capnophiles. One common approach to grow capnophiles is to use a candle jar. A candle jar
consists of a jar with a tight-fitting lid that can accommodate the cultures and a candle. After the cultures are added
to the jar, the candle is lit and the lid closed. As the candle burns, it consumes most of the oxygen present and
releases CO2.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What substance is added to a sample to detect catalase?
• What is the function of the candle in a candle jar?
CLINICAL FOCUS
Part 2
The health-care provider who saw Jeni was concerned primarily because of her pregnancy. Her condition
enhances the risk for infections and makes her more vulnerable to those infections. The immune system is
downregulated during pregnancy, and pathogens that cross the placenta can be very dangerous for the fetus. A
note on the provider’s order to the microbiology lab mentions a suspicion of infection by Listeria
monocytogenes, based on the signs and symptoms exhibited by the patient.
Jeni’s blood samples are streaked directly on sheep blood agar, a medium containing tryptic soy agar enriched
with 5% sheep blood. (Blood is considered sterile; therefore, competing microorganisms are not expected in the
medium.) The inoculated plates are incubated at 37 °C for 24 to 48 hours. Small grayish colonies surrounded by
a clear zone emerge. Such colonies are typical of Listeria and other pathogens such as streptococci; the clear
zone surrounding the colonies indicates complete lysis of blood in the medium, referred to as beta-hemolysis
(Figure 9.24). When tested for the presence of catalase, the colonies give a positive response, eliminating
Streptococcus as a possible cause. Furthermore, a Gram stain shows short gram-positive bacilli. Cells from a
broth culture grown at room temperature displayed the tumbling motility characteristic of Listeria (Figure 9.24).
All of these clues lead the lab to positively confirm the presence of Listeria in Jeni’s blood samples.
• How serious is Jeni’s condition and what is the appropriate treatment?
=== PDF PAGE 358 ===
344 9 • Microbial Growth
FIGURE 9.24 (a) A sample blood agar test showing beta-hemolysis. (b) A sample motility test showing both positive and negative
results. (credit a: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; credit b: modification of work by
“VeeDunn”/Flickr)
Jump to the next Clinical Focus box. Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
9.3 The Effects of pH on Microbial Growth
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Illustrate and briefly describe minimum, optimum, and maximum pH requirements for growth
• Identify and describe the different categories of microbes with pH requirements for growth: acidophiles,
neutrophiles, and alkaliphiles
• Give examples of microorganisms for each category of pH requirement
Yogurt, pickles, sauerkraut, and lime-seasoned dishes all owe their tangy taste to a high acid content (Figure 9.25).
Recall that acidity is a function of the concentration of hydrogen ions [H+] and is measured as pH. Environments with
pH values below 7.0 are considered acidic, whereas those with pH values above 7.0 are considered basic. Extreme
pH affects the structure of all macromolecules. The hydrogen bonds holding together strands of DNA break up at
high pH. Lipids are hydrolyzed by an extremely basic pH. The proton motive force responsible for production of ATP
in cellular respiration depends on the concentration gradient of H+ across the plasma membrane (see Cellular
Respiration). If H+ ions are neutralized by hydroxide ions, the concentration gradient collapses and impairs energy
production. But the component most sensitive to pH in the cell is its workhorse, the protein. Moderate changes in pH
modify the ionization of amino-acid functional groups and disrupt hydrogen bonding, which, in turn, promotes
changes in the folding of the molecule, promoting denaturation and destroying activity.
FIGURE 9.25 Lactic acid bacteria that ferment milk into yogurt or transform vegetables in pickles thrive at a pH close to 4.0. Sauerkraut and
dishes such as pico de gallo owe their tangy flavor to their acidity. Acidic foods have been a mainstay of the human diet for centuries, partly
because most microbes that cause food spoilage grow best at a near neutral pH and do not tolerate acidity well. (credit “yogurt”:
modification of work by “nina.jsc”/Flickr; credit “pickles”: modification of work by Noah Sussman; credit “sauerkraut”: modification of work
by Jesse LaBuff; credit “pico de gallo”: modification of work by “regan76”/Flickr)
The optimum growth pH is the most favorable pH for the growth of an organism. The lowest pH value that an
organism can tolerate is called the minimum growth pH and the highest pH is the maximum growth pH. These
values can cover a wide range, which is important for the preservation of food and to microorganisms’ survival in the
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 359 ===
9.3 • The Effects of pH on Microbial Growth 345
stomach. For example, the optimum growth pH of Salmonella spp. is 7.0–7.5, but the minimum growth pH is closer
to 4.2.
Most bacteria are neutrophiles, meaning they grow optimally at a pH within one or two pH units of the neutral pH of
7 (see Figure 9.26). Most familiar bacteria, like Escherichia coli, staphylococci, and Salmonella spp. are neutrophiles
and do not fare well in the acidic pH of the stomach. However, there are pathogenic strains of E. coli, S. typhi, and
other species of intestinal pathogens that are much more resistant to stomach acid. In comparison, fungi thrive at
slightly acidic pH values of 5.0–6.0.
Microorganisms that grow optimally at pH less than 5.55 are called acidophiles. For example, the sulfur-oxidizing
Sulfolobus spp. isolated from sulfur mud fields and hot springs in Yellowstone National Park are extreme
acidophiles. These archaea survive at pH values of 2.5–3.5. Species of the archaean genus Ferroplasma live in acid
mine drainage at pH values of 0–2.9. Lactobacillus bacteria, which are an important part of the normal microbiota of
the vagina, can tolerate acidic environments at pH values 3.5–6.8 and also contribute to the acidity of the vagina
(pH of 4, except at the onset of menstruation) through their metabolic production of lactic acid. The vagina’s acidity
plays an important role in inhibiting other microbes that are less tolerant of acidity. Acidophilic microorganisms
display a number of adaptations to survive in strong acidic environments. For example, proteins show increased
negative surface charge that stabilizes them at low pH. Pumps actively eject H+ ions out of the cells. The changes in
the composition of membrane phospholipids probably reflect the need to maintain membrane fluidity at low pH.
FIGURE 9.26 The curves show the approximate pH ranges for the growth of the different classes of pH-specific prokaryotes. Each curve
has an optimal pH and extreme pH values at which growth is much reduced. Most bacteria are neutrophiles and grow best at near-neutral
pH (center curve). Acidophiles have optimal growth at pH values near 3 and alkaliphiles have optimal growth at pH values above 9.
At the other end of the spectrum are alkaliphiles, microorganisms that grow best at pH between 8.0 and 10.5.
Vibrio cholerae, the pathogenic agent of cholera, grows best at the slightly basic pH of 8.0; it can survive pH values
of 11.0 but is inactivated by the acid of the stomach. When it comes to survival at high pH, the bright pink archaean
Natronobacterium, found in the soda lakes of the African Rift Valley, may hold the record at a pH of 10.5 (Figure
9.27). Extreme alkaliphiles have adapted to their harsh environment through evolutionary modification of lipid and
protein structure and compensatory mechanisms to maintain the proton motive force in an alkaline environment.
For example, the alkaliphile Bacillus firmus derives the energy for transport reactions and motility from a Na+ ion
gradient rather than a proton motive force. Many enzymes from alkaliphiles have a higher isoelectric point, due to an
increase in the number of basic amino acids, than homologous enzymes from neutrophiles.
=== PDF PAGE 360 ===
346 9 • Microbial Growth
FIGURE 9.27 View from space of Lake Natron in Tanzania. The pink color is due to the pigmentation of the extreme alkaliphilic and
halophilic microbes that colonize the lake. (credit: NASA)
MICRO CONNECTIONS
Survival at the Low pH of the Stomach
Peptic ulcers (or stomach ulcers) are painful sores on the stomach lining. Until the 1980s, they were believed to be
caused by spicy foods, stress, or a combination of both. Patients were typically advised to eat bland foods, take anti-
acid medications, and avoid stress. These remedies were not particularly effective, and the condition often recurred.
This all changed dramatically when the real cause of most peptic ulcers was discovered to be a slim, corkscrew-
shaped bacterium, Helicobacter pylori. This organism was identified and isolated by Barry Marshall and Robin
Warren, whose discovery earned them the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 2005.
The ability of H. pylori to survive the low pH of the stomach would seem to suggest that it is an extreme acidophile.
As it turns out, this is not the case. In fact, H. pylori is a neutrophile. So, how does it survive in the stomach?
Remarkably, H. pylori creates a microenvironment in which the pH is nearly neutral. It achieves this by producing
large amounts of the enzyme urease, which breaks down urea to form NH4 + and CO2. The ammonium ion raises the
pH of the immediate environment.
This metabolic capability of H. pylori is the basis of an accurate, noninvasive test for infection. The patient is given a
solution of urea containing radioactively labeled carbon atoms. If H. pylori is present in the stomach, it will rapidly
break down the urea, producing radioactive CO2 that can be detected in the patient’s breath. Because peptic ulcers
may lead to gastric cancer, patients who are determined to have H. pylori infections are treated with antibiotics.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What effect do extremes of pH have on proteins?
• What pH-adaptive type of bacteria would most human pathogens be?
9.4 Temperature and Microbial Growth
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Illustrate and briefly describe minimum, optimum, and maximum temperature requirements for growth
• Identify and describe different categories of microbes with temperature requirements for growth:
psychrophile, psychrotrophs, mesophile, thermophile, hyperthermophile
• Give examples of microorganisms in each category of temperature tolerance
When the exploration of Lake Whillans started in Antarctica, researchers did not expect to find much life. Constant
subzero temperatures and lack of obvious sources of nutrients did not seem to be conditions that would support a
thriving ecosystem. To their surprise, the samples retrieved from the lake showed abundant microbial life. In a
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 361 ===
9.4 • Temperature and Microbial Growth 347
different but equally harsh setting, bacteria grow at the bottom of the ocean in sea vents (Figure 9.28), where
temperatures can reach 340 °C (700 °F).
Microbes can be roughly classified according to the range of temperature at which they can grow. The growth rates
are the highest at the optimum growth temperature for the organism. The lowest temperature at which the
organism can survive and replicate is its minimum growth temperature. The highest temperature at which growth
can occur is its maximum growth temperature. The following ranges of permissive growth temperatures are
approximate only and can vary according to other environmental factors.
Organisms categorized as mesophiles (“middle loving”) are adapted to moderate temperatures, with optimal
growth temperatures ranging from room temperature (about 20 °C) to about 45 °C. As would be expected from the
core temperature of the human body, 37 °C (98.6 °F), normal human microbiota and pathogens (e.g., E. coli,
Salmonella spp., and Lactobacillus spp.) are mesophiles.
Organisms called psychrotrophs, also known as psychrotolerant, prefer cooler environments, from a high
temperature of 25 °C to refrigeration temperature about 4 °C. They are found in many natural environments in
temperate climates. They are also responsible for the spoilage of refrigerated food.
CLINICAL FOCUS
Resolution
The presence of Listeria in Jeni’s blood suggests that her symptoms are due to listeriosis, an infection caused by
L. monocytogenes. Listeriosis is a serious infection with a 20% mortality rate and is a particular risk to Jeni’s
fetus. A sample from the amniotic fluid cultured for the presence of Listeria gave negative results. Because the
absence of organisms does not rule out the possibility of infection, a molecular test based on the nucleic acid
amplification of the 16S ribosomal RNA of Listeria was performed to confirm that no bacteria crossed the
placenta. Fortunately, the results from the molecular test were also negative.
Jeni was admitted to the hospital for treatment and recovery. She received a high dose of two antibiotics
intravenously for 2 weeks. The preferred drugs for the treatment of listeriosis are ampicillin or penicillin G with
an aminoglycoside antibiotic. Resistance to common antibiotics is still rare in Listeria and antibiotic treatment is
usually successful. She was released to home care after a week and fully recovered from her infection.
L. monocytogenes is a gram-positive short rod found in soil, water, and food. It is classified as a psychrophile
and is halotolerant. Its ability to multiply at refrigeration temperatures (4–10 °C) and its tolerance for high
concentrations of salt (up to 10% sodium chloride [NaCl]) make it a frequent source of food poisoning. Because
Listeria can infect animals, it often contaminates food such as meat, fish, or dairy products. Contamination of
commercial foods can often be traced to persistent biofilms that form on manufacturing equipment that is not
sufficiently cleaned.
Listeria infection is relatively common among pregnant people because the elevated levels of progesterone
downregulate the immune system, making them more vulnerable to infection. The pathogen can cross the
placenta and infect the fetus, often resulting in miscarriage, stillbirth, or fatal neonatal infection. Pregnant
people are thus advised to avoid consumption of soft cheeses, refrigerated cold cuts, smoked seafood, and
unpasteurized dairy products. Because Listeria bacteria can easily be confused with diphtheroids, another
common group of gram-positive rods, it is important to alert the laboratory when listeriosis is suspected.
Go back to the previous Clinical Focus box.
The organisms retrieved from arctic lakes such as Lake Whillans are considered extreme psychrophiles (cold
loving). Psychrophiles are microorganisms that can grow at 0 °C and below, have an optimum growth temperature
close to
15 °C, and usually do not survive at temperatures above 20 °C. They are found in permanently cold environments
such as the deep waters of the oceans. Because they are active at low temperature, psychrophiles and
psychrotrophs are important decomposers in cold climates.
Organisms that grow at optimum temperatures of 50 °C to a maximum of 80 °C are called thermophiles (“heat
=== PDF PAGE 362 ===
348 9 • Microbial Growth
loving”). They do not multiply at room temperature. Thermophiles are widely distributed in hot springs, geothermal
soils, and manmade environments such as garden compost piles where the microbes break down kitchen scraps
and vegetal material. Examples of thermophiles include Thermus aquaticus and Geobacillus spp. Higher up on the
extreme temperature scale we find the hyperthermophiles, which are characterized by growth ranges from 80 °C to
a maximum of 110 °C, with some extreme examples that survive temperatures above 121 °C, the average
temperature of an autoclave. The hydrothermal vents at the bottom of the ocean are a prime example of extreme
environments, with temperatures reaching an estimated 340 °C (Figure 9.28). Microbes isolated from the vents
achieve optimal growth at temperatures higher than 100 °C. Noteworthy examples are Pyrobolus and Pyrodictium,
archaea that grow at 105 °C and survive autoclaving. Figure 9.29 shows the typical skewed curves of temperature-
dependent growth for the categories of microorganisms we have discussed.
FIGURE 9.28 A black smoker at the bottom of the ocean belches hot, chemical-rich water, and heats the surrounding waters. Sea vents
provide an extreme environment that is nonetheless teeming with macroscopic life (the red tubeworms) supported by an abundant
microbial ecosystem. (credit: NOAA)
FIGURE 9.29 The graph shows growth rate of bacteria as a function of temperature. Notice that the curves are skewed toward the optimum
temperature. The skewing of the growth curve is thought to reflect the rapid denaturation of proteins as the temperature rises past the
optimum for growth of the microorganism.
Life in extreme environments raises fascinating questions about the adaptation of macromolecules and metabolic
processes. Very low temperatures affect cells in many ways. Membranes lose their fluidity and are damaged by ice
crystal formation. Chemical reactions and diffusion slow considerably. Proteins become too rigid to catalyze
reactions and may undergo denaturation. At the opposite end of the temperature spectrum, heat denatures proteins
and nucleic acids. Increased fluidity impairs metabolic processes in membranes. Some of the practical applications
of the destructive effects of heat on microbes are sterilization by steam, pasteurization, and incineration of
inoculating loops. Proteins in psychrophiles are, in general, rich in hydrophobic residues, display an increase in
flexibility, and have a lower number of secondary stabilizing bonds when compared with homologous proteins from
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 363 ===
9.4 • Temperature and Microbial Growth 349
mesophiles. Antifreeze proteins and solutes that decrease the freezing temperature of the cytoplasm are common.
The lipids in the membranes tend to be unsaturated to increase fluidity. Growth rates are much slower than those
encountered at moderate temperatures. Under appropriate conditions, mesophiles and even thermophiles can
survive freezing. Liquid cultures of bacteria are mixed with sterile glycerol solutions and frozen to −80 °C for long-
term storage as stocks. Cultures can withstand freeze drying (lyophilization) and then be stored as powders in
sealed ampules to be reconstituted with broth when needed.
Macromolecules in thermophiles and hyperthermophiles show some notable structural differences from what is
observed in the mesophiles. The ratio of saturated to polyunsaturated lipids increases to limit the fluidity of the cell
membranes. Their DNA sequences show a higher proportion of guanine–cytosine nitrogenous bases, which are held
together by three hydrogen bonds in contrast to adenine and thymine, which are connected in the double helix by
two hydrogen bonds. Additional secondary structures, ionic and covalent bonds, as well as the replacement of key
amino acids to stabilize folding, contribute to the resistance of proteins to denaturation. The so-called
thermoenzymes purified from thermophiles have important practical applications. For example, amplification of
nucleic acids in the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) depends on the thermal stability of Taq polymerase, an enzyme
isolated from T. aquaticus. Degradation enzymes from thermophiles are added as ingredients in hot-water
detergents, increasing their effectiveness.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• What temperature requirements do most bacterial human pathogens have?
• What DNA adaptation do thermophiles exhibit?
EYE ON ETHICS
Feeding the World…and the World’s Algae
Artificial fertilizers have become an important tool in food production around the world. They are responsible for
many of the gains of the so-called green revolution of the 20th century, which has allowed the planet to feed
many of its more than 7 billion people. Artificial fertilizers provide nitrogen and phosphorus, key limiting
nutrients, to crop plants, removing the normal barriers that would otherwise limit the rate of growth. Thus,
fertilized crops grow much faster, and farms that use fertilizer produce higher crop yields.
However, careless use and overuse of artificial fertilizers have been demonstrated to have significant negative
impacts on aquatic ecosystems, both freshwater and marine. Fertilizers that are applied at inappropriate times
or in too-large quantities allow nitrogen and phosphorus compounds to escape use by crop plants and enter
drainage systems. Inappropriate use of fertilizers in residential settings can also contribute to nutrient loads,
which find their way to lakes and coastal marine ecosystems. As water warms and nutrients are plentiful,
microscopic algae bloom, often changing the color of the water because of the high cell density.
Most algal blooms are not directly harmful to humans or wildlife; however, they can cause harm indirectly. As the
algal population expands and then dies, it provides a large increase in organic matter to the bacteria that live in
deep water. With this large supply of nutrients, the population of nonphotosynthetic microorganisms explodes,
consuming available oxygen and creating “dead zones” where animal life has virtually disappeared.
Depletion of oxygen in the water is not the only damaging consequence of some algal blooms. The algae that
produce red tides in the Gulf of Mexico, Karenia brevis, secrete potent toxins that can kill fish and other
organisms and also accumulate in shellfish. Consumption of contaminated shellfish can cause severe
neurological and gastrointestinal symptoms in humans. Shellfish beds must be regularly monitored for the
presence of the toxins, and harvests are often shut down when it is present, incurring economic costs to the
fishery. Cyanobacteria, which can form blooms in marine and freshwater ecosystems, produce toxins called
microcystins, which can cause allergic reactions and liver damage when ingested in drinking water or during
swimming. Recurring cyanobacterial algal blooms in Lake Erie (Figure 9.30) have forced municipalities to issue
drinking water bans for days at a time because of unacceptable toxin levels.
=== PDF PAGE 364 ===
350 9 • Microbial Growth
This is just a small sampling of the negative consequences of algal blooms, red tides, and dead zones. Yet the
benefits of crop fertilizer—the main cause of such blooms—are difficult to dispute. There is no easy solution to
this dilemma, as a ban on fertilizers is not politically or economically feasible. In lieu of this, we must advocate
for responsible use and regulation in agricultural and residential contexts, as well as the restoration of wetlands,
which can absorb excess fertilizers before they reach lakes and oceans.
FIGURE 9.30 Heavy rains cause runoff of fertilizers into Lake Erie, triggering extensive algal blooms, which can be observed along the
shoreline. Notice the brown unplanted and green planted agricultural land on the shore. (credit: NASA)
LINK TO LEARNING
This video (https://openstax.org/l/22algaebloomvid) discusses algal blooms and dead zones in more depth.
9.5 Other Environmental Conditions that Affect Growth
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify and describe different categories of microbes with specific growth requirements other than
oxygen, pH, and temperature, such as altered barometric pressure, osmotic pressure, humidity, and light
• Give at least one example microorganism for each category of growth requirement
Microorganisms interact with their environment along more dimensions than pH, temperature, and free oxygen
levels, although these factors require significant adaptations. We also find microorganisms adapted to varying levels
of salinity, barometric pressure, humidity, and light.
Osmotic and Barometric Pressure
Most natural environments tend to have lower solute concentrations than the cytoplasm of most microorganisms.
Rigid cell walls protect the cells from bursting in a dilute environment. Not much protection is available against high
osmotic pressure. In this case, water, following its concentration gradient, flows out of the cell. This results in
plasmolysis (the shrinking of the protoplasm away from the intact cell wall) and cell death. This fact explains why
brines and layering meat and fish in salt are time-honored methods of preserving food. Microorganisms called
halophiles (“salt loving”) actually require high salt concentrations for growth. These organisms are found in marine
environments where salt concentrations hover at 3.5%. Extreme halophilic microorganisms, such as the red alga
Dunaliella salina and the archaeal species Halobacterium in Figure 9.31, grow in hypersaline lakes such as the Great
Salt Lake, which is 3.5–8 times saltier than the ocean, and the Dead Sea, which is 10 times saltier than the ocean.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 365 ===
9.5 • Other Environmental Conditions that Affect Growth 351
FIGURE 9.31 Photograph taken from space of the Great Salt Lake in Utah. The purple color is caused by high density of the alga Dunaliella
and the archaean Halobacterium spp. (credit: NASA)
Dunaliella spp. counters the tremendous osmotic pressure of the environment with a high cytoplasmic
concentration of glycerol and by actively pumping out salt ions. Halobacterium spp. accumulates large
concentrations of K+ and other ions in its cytoplasm. Its proteins are designed for high salt concentrations and lose
activity at salt concentrations below 1–2 M. Although most halotolerant organisms, for example Halomonas spp. in
salt marshes, do not need high concentrations of salt for growth, they will survive and divide in the presence of high
salt. Not surprisingly, the staphylococci, micrococci, and corynebacteria that colonize our skin tolerate salt in their
environment. Halotolerant pathogens are an important cause of food-borne illnesses because they survive and
multiply in salty food. For example, the halotolerant bacteria S. aureus, Bacillus cereus, and V. cholerae produce
dangerous enterotoxins and are major causes of food poisoning.
Microorganisms depend on available water to grow. Available moisture is measured as water activity (aw), which is
the ratio of the vapor pressure of the medium of interest to the vapor pressure of pure distilled water; therefore, the
aw of water is equal to 1.0. Bacteria require high aw (0.97–0.99), whereas fungi can tolerate drier environments; for
example, the range of aw for growth of Aspergillus spp. is 0.8–0.75. Decreasing the water content of foods by drying,
as in jerky, or through freeze-drying or by increasing osmotic pressure, as in brine and jams, are common methods of
preventing spoilage.
Microorganisms that require high atmospheric pressure for growth are called barophiles. The bacteria that live at
the bottom of the ocean must be able to withstand great pressures. Because it is difficult to retrieve intact
specimens and reproduce such growth conditions in the laboratory, the characteristics of these microorganisms are
largely unknown.
Light
Photoautotrophs, such as cyanobacteria or green sulfur bacteria, and photoheterotrophs, such as purple nonsulfur
bacteria, depend on sufficient light intensity at the wavelengths absorbed by their pigments to grow and multiply.
Energy from light is captured by pigments and converted into chemical energy that drives carbon fixation and other
metabolic processes. The portion of the electromagnetic spectrum that is absorbed by these organisms is defined
as photosynthetically active radiation (PAR). It lies within the visible light spectrum ranging from 400 to 700
nanometers (nm) and extends in the near infrared for some photosynthetic bacteria. A number of accessory
pigments, such as fucoxanthin in brown algae and phycobilins in cyanobacteria, widen the useful range of
wavelengths for photosynthesis and compensate for the low light levels available at greater depths of water. Other
microorganisms, such as the archaea of the class Halobacteria, use light energy to drive their proton and sodium
pumps. The light is absorbed by a pigment protein complex called bacteriorhodopsin, which is similar to the eye
pigment rhodopsin. Photosynthetic bacteria are present not only in aquatic environments but also in soil and in
symbiosis with fungi in lichens. The peculiar watermelon snow is caused by a microalga Chlamydomonas nivalis, a
=== PDF PAGE 366 ===
352 9 • Microbial Growth
green alga rich in a secondary red carotenoid pigment (astaxanthin) which gives the pink hue to the snow where the
alga grows.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Which photosynthetic pigments were described in this section?
• What is the fundamental stress of a hypersaline environment for a cell?
9.6 Media Used for Bacterial Growth
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify and describe culture media for the growth of bacteria, including examples of all-purpose media,
enriched, selective, differential, defined, and enrichment media
The study of microorganisms is greatly facilitated if we are able to culture them, that is, to keep reproducing
populations alive under laboratory conditions. Culturing many microorganisms is challenging because of highly
specific nutritional and environmental requirements and the diversity of these requirements among different
species.
Nutritional Requirements
The number of available media to grow bacteria is considerable. Some media are considered general all-purpose
media and support growth of a large variety of organisms. A prime example of an all-purpose medium is tryptic soy
broth (TSB). Specialized media are used in the identification of bacteria and are supplemented with dyes, pH
indicators, or antibiotics. One type, enriched media, contains growth factors, vitamins, and other essential nutrients
to promote the growth of fastidious organisms, organisms that cannot make certain nutrients and require them to
be added to the medium. When the complete chemical composition of a medium is known, it is called a chemically
defined medium. For example, in EZ medium, all individual chemical components are identified and the exact
amounts of each is known. In complex media, which contain extracts and digests of yeasts, meat, or plants, the
precise chemical composition of the medium is not known. Amounts of individual components are undetermined
and variable. Nutrient broth, tryptic soy broth, and brain heart infusion, are all examples of complex media.
Non-selective media support the growth of all microorganisms without any specific inhibition. They may be used to
cultivate organisms for other uses, as well as in specific procedures. The Mueller-Hinton agar, developed by John
Mueller and Jane Hinton, is a non-selective media often used to test antibiotics and such as in the Kirby-Bauer disc
diffusion test (described in the chapter on Antimicrobial Drugs). In addition to beef extract and agar, it contains
starch, which supports growth and also absorbs toxins, which ensures that the antibiotics continue to function.
Mueller-Hinton agar is also known as a loose agar, which allows chemicals to diffuse more effectively than similar
substances.
Media that inhibit the growth of unwanted microorganisms and support the growth of the organism of interest by
supplying nutrients and reducing competition are called selective media. An example of a selective medium is
MacConkey agar. It contains bile salts and crystal violet, which interfere with the growth of many gram-positive
bacteria and favor the growth of gram-negative bacteria, particularly the Enterobacteriaceae. These species are
commonly named enterics, reside in the intestine, and are adapted to the presence of bile salts. The enrichment
cultures foster the preferential growth of a desired microorganism that represents a fraction of the organisms
present in an inoculum. For example, if we want to isolate bacteria that break down crude oil, hydrocarbonoclastic
bacteria, sequential subculturing in a medium that supplies carbon only in the form of crude oil will enrich the
cultures with oil-eating bacteria. The differential media make it easy to distinguish colonies of different bacteria by
a change in the color of the colonies or the color of the medium. Color changes are the result of end products
created by interaction of bacterial enzymes with differential substrates in the medium or, in the case of hemolytic
reactions, the lysis of red blood cells in the medium. In Figure 9.32, the differential fermentation of lactose can be
observed on MacConkey agar. The lactose fermenters produce acid, which turns the medium and the colonies of
strong fermenters hot pink. The medium is supplemented with the pH indicator neutral red, which turns to hot pink
at low pH. Selective and differential media can be combined and play an important role in the identification of
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 367 ===
9.6 • Media Used for Bacterial Growth 353
bacteria by biochemical methods.
FIGURE 9.32 On this MacConkey agar plate, the lactose-fermenter E. coli colonies are bright pink. Serratia marcescens, which does not
ferment lactose, forms a cream-colored streak on the tan medium. (credit: American Society for Microbiology)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
• Distinguish complex and chemically defined media.
• Distinguish selective and enrichment media.
LINK TO LEARNING
Compare the compositions of EZ medium (https://openstax.org/l/22EZMedium) and sheep blood
(https://openstax.org/l/22bloodagar) agar.
CASE IN POINT
The End-of-Year Picnic
The microbiology department is celebrating the end of the school year in May by holding its traditional picnic on
the green. The speeches drag on for a couple of hours, but finally all the faculty and students can dig into the
food: chicken salad, tomatoes, onions, salad, and custard pie. By evening, the whole department, except for two
vegetarian students who did not eat the chicken salad, is stricken with nausea, vomiting, retching, and
abdominal cramping. Several individuals complain of diarrhea. One patient shows signs of shock (low blood
pressure). Blood and stool samples are collected from patients, and an analysis of all foods served at the meal is
conducted.
Bacteria can cause gastroenteritis (inflammation of the stomach and intestinal tract) either by colonizing and
replicating in the host, which is considered an infection, or by secreting toxins, which is considered intoxication.
Signs and symptoms of infections are typically delayed, whereas intoxication manifests within hours, as
happened after the picnic.
Blood samples from the patients showed no signs of bacterial infection, which further suggests that this was a
case of intoxication. Since intoxication is due to secreted toxins, bacteria are not usually detected in blood or
stool samples. MacConkey agar and sorbitol-MacConkey agar plates and xylose-lysine-deoxycholate (XLD)
plates were inoculated with stool samples and did not reveal any unusually colored colonies, and no black
colonies or white colonies were observed on XLD. All lactose fermenters on MacConkey agar also ferment
sorbitol. These results ruled out common agents of food-borne illnesses: E. coli, Salmonella spp., and Shigella
spp.
Analysis of the chicken salad revealed an abnormal number of gram-positive cocci arranged in clusters (Figure
=== PDF PAGE 368 ===
354 9 • Microbial Growth
9.33). A culture of the gram-positive cocci releases bubbles when mixed with hydrogen peroxide. The culture
turned mannitol salt agar yellow after a 24-hour incubation.
All the tests point to Staphylococcus aureus as the organism that secreted the toxin. Samples from the salad
showed the presence of gram-positive cocci bacteria in clusters. The colonies were positive for catalase. The
bacteria grew on mannitol salt agar fermenting mannitol, as shown by the change to yellow of the medium. The
pH indicator in mannitol salt agar is phenol red, which turns to yellow when the medium is acidified by the
products of fermentation.
The toxin secreted by S. aureus is known to cause severe gastroenteritis. The organism was probably introduced
into the salad during preparation by the food handler and multiplied while the salad was kept in the warm
ambient temperature during the speeches.
• What are some other factors that might have contributed to rapid growth of S. aureus in the chicken salad?
• Why would S. aureus not be inhibited by the presence of salt in the chicken salad?
FIGURE 9.33 Gram-positive cocci in clusters. (credit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 369 ===
9 • Summary 355
Summary
9.1 How Microbes Grow acceptor other than oxygen.
• Facultative anaerobes show better growth in the
• Most bacterial cells divide by binary fission.
presence of oxygen but will also grow without it.
Generation time in bacterial growth is defined as
• Although aerotolerant anaerobes do not
the doubling time of the population.
perform aerobic respiration, they can grow in the
• Cells in a closed system follow a pattern of
presence of oxygen. Most aerotolerant anaerobes
growth with four phases: lag, logarithmic
test negative for the enzyme catalase.
(exponential), stationary, and death.
• Microaerophiles need oxygen to grow, albeit at a
• Cells can be counted by direct viable cell count.
lower concentration than 21% oxygen in air.
The pour plate and spread plate methods are
• Optimum oxygen concentration for an organism
used to plate serial dilutions into or onto,
is the oxygen level that promotes the fastest
respectively, agar to allow counting of viable cells
growth rate. The minimum permissive oxygen
that give rise to colony-forming units.
concentration and the maximum permissive
Membrane filtration is used to count live cells in
oxygen concentration are, respectively, the
dilute solutions. The most probable cell number
lowest and the highest oxygen levels that the
(MPN) method allows estimation of cell numbers
organism will tolerate.
in cultures without using solid media.
• Peroxidase, superoxide dismutase, and
• Indirect methods can be used to estimate
catalase are the main enzymes involved in the
culture density by measuring turbidity of a
detoxification of the reactive oxygen species.
culture or live cell density by measuring
Superoxide dismutase is usually present in a cell
metabolic activity.
that can tolerate oxygen. All three enzymes are
• Other patterns of cell division include multiple
usually detectable in cells that perform aerobic
nucleoid formation in cells; asymmetric division,
respiration and produce more ROS.
as in budding; and the formation of hyphae and
• A capnophile is an organism that requires a
terminal spores.
higher than atmospheric concentration of CO2 to
• Biofilms are communities of microorganisms
grow.
enmeshed in a matrix of extracellular polymeric
substance. The formation of a biofilm occurs 9.3 The Effects of pH on Microbial Growth
when planktonic cells attach to a substrate and
• Bacteria are generally neutrophiles. They grow
become sessile. Cells in biofilms coordinate their
best at neutral pH close to 7.0.
activity by communicating through quorum
• Acidophiles grow optimally at a pH near 3.0.
sensing.
Alkaliphiles are organisms that grow optimally
• Biofilms are commonly found on surfaces in
between a pH of 8 and 10.5. Extreme acidophiles
nature and in the human body, where they may
and alkaliphiles grow slowly or not at all near
be beneficial or cause severe infections.
neutral pH.
Pathogens associated with biofilms are often
• Microorganisms grow best at their optimum
more resistant to antibiotics and disinfectants.
growth pH. Growth occurs slowly or not at all
9.2 Oxygen Requirements for Microbial below the minimum growth pH and above the
Growth maximum growth pH.
• Aerobic and anaerobic environments can be 9.4 Temperature and Microbial Growth
found in diverse niches throughout nature,
• Microorganisms thrive at a wide range of
including different sites within and on the human
temperatures; they have colonized different
body.
natural environments and have adapted to
• Microorganisms vary in their requirements for
extreme temperatures. Both extreme cold and
molecular oxygen. Obligate aerobes depend on
hot temperatures require evolutionary
aerobic respiration and use oxygen as a terminal
adjustments to macromolecules and biological
electron acceptor. They cannot grow without
processes.
oxygen.
• Psychrophiles grow best in the temperature
• Obligate anaerobes cannot grow in the presence
range of 0–15 °C whereas psychrotrophs thrive
of oxygen. They depend on fermentation and
between 4°C and 25 °C.
anaerobic respiration using a final electron
• Mesophiles grow best at moderate temperatures
=== PDF PAGE 370 ===
356 9 • Review Questions
in the range of 20 °C to about 45 °C. Pathogens foods preserved in salt.
are usually mesophiles. • Photosynthetic bacteria depend on visible light
• Thermophiles and hyperthemophiles are for energy.
adapted to life at temperatures above 50 °C. • Most bacteria, with few exceptions, require high
• Adaptations to cold and hot temperatures moisture to grow.
require changes in the composition of membrane
9.6 Media Used for Bacterial Growth
lipids and proteins.
• Chemically defined media contain only
9.5 Other Environmental Conditions that
chemically known components.
Affect Growth
• Selective media favor the growth of some
• Halophiles require high salt concentration in the microorganisms while inhibiting others.
medium, whereas halotolerant organisms can • Enriched media contain added essential
grow and multiply in the presence of high salt but nutrients a specific organism needs to grow
do not require it for growth. • Differential media help distinguish bacteria by
• Halotolerant pathogens are an important source the color of the colonies or the change in the
of foodborne illnesses because they contaminate medium.
Review Questions
Multiple Choice
1 . Which of the following methods would be used phase
to measure the concentration of bacterial
contamination in processed peanut butter? 5 . What is the function of the Z ring in binary
A. turbidity measurement fission?
B. total plate count A. It controls the replication of DNA.
C. dry weight measurement B. It forms a contractile ring at the septum.
D. direct counting of bacteria on a calibrated C. It separates the newly synthesized DNA
slide under the microscope molecules.
D. It mediates the addition of new
2 . In which phase would you expect to observe the peptidoglycan subunits.
most endospores in a Bacillus cell culture?
A. death phase 6 . If a culture starts with 50 cells, how many cells
B. lag phase will be present after five generations with no cell
C. log phase death?
D. log, lag, and death phases would all have A. 200
roughly the same number of endospores. B. 400
C. 1600
3 . During which phase would penicillin, an D. 3200
antibiotic that inhibits cell-wall synthesis, be
most effective? 7 . Filamentous cyanobacteria often divide by which
A. death phase of the following?
B. lag phase A. budding
C. log phase B. mitosis
D. stationary phase C. fragmentation
D. formation of endospores
4 . Which of the following is the best definition of
generation time in a bacterium? 8 . Which is a reason for antimicrobial resistance
A. the length of time it takes to reach the log being higher in a biofilm than in free-floating
phase bacterial cells?
B. the length of time it takes for a population A. The EPS allows faster diffusion of
of cells to double chemicals in the biofilm.
C. the time it takes to reach stationary phase B. Cells are more metabolically active at the
D. the length of time of the exponential base of a biofilm.
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 371 ===
9 • Review Questions 357
C. Cells are metabolically inactive at the base 14 . Streptococcus mutans is a major cause of
of a biofilm. cavities. It resides in the gum pockets, does not
D. The structure of a biofilm favors the have catalase activity, and can be grown outside
survival of antibiotic resistant cells. of an anaerobic chamber. The bacterium is
probably which of the following?
9 . Quorum sensing is used by bacterial cells to A. a facultative anaerobe
determine which of the following? B. an obligate aerobe
A. the size of the population C. an obligate anaerobe
B. the availability of nutrients D. an aerotolerant anaerobe
C. the speed of water flow
D. the density of the population 15 . Why do the instructions for the growth of
Neisseria gonorrhoeae recommend a
10 . Which of the following statements about CO2-enriched atmosphere?
autoinducers is incorrect? A. It uses CO2 as a final electron acceptor in
A. They bind directly to DNA to activate respiration.
transcription. B. It is an obligate anaerobe.
B. They can activate the cell that secreted C. It is a capnophile.
them. D. It fixes CO2 through photosynthesis.
C. N-acylated homoserine lactones are
autoinducers in gram-negative cells. 16 . Bacteria that grow in mine drainage at pH 1–2
D. Autoinducers may stimulate the are probably which of the following?
production of virulence factors. A. alkaliphiles
B. acidophiles
11 . An inoculated thioglycolate medium culture tube C. neutrophiles
shows dense growth at the surface and turbidity D. obligate anaerobes
throughout the rest of the tube. What is your
conclusion? 17 . Bacteria isolated from Lake Natron, where the
A. The organisms die in the presence of water pH is close to 10, are which of the
oxygen following?
B. The organisms are facultative anaerobes. A. alkaliphiles
C. The organisms should be grown in an B. facultative anaerobes
anaerobic chamber. C. neutrophiles
D. The organisms are obligate aerobes. D. obligate anaerobes
12 . An inoculated thioglycolate medium culture tube 18 . In which environment are you most likely to
is clear throughout the tube except for dense encounter an acidophile?
growth at the bottom of the tube. What is your A. human blood at pH 7.2
conclusion? B. a hot vent at pH 1.5
A. The organisms are obligate anaerobes. C. human intestine at pH 8.5
B. The organisms are facultative anaerobes. D. milk at pH 6.5
C. The organisms are aerotolerant.
D. The organisms are obligate aerobes. 19 . A soup container was forgotten in the
refrigerator and shows contamination. The
13 . Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a common contaminants are probably which of the
pathogen that infects the airways of patients following?
with cystic fibrosis. It does not grow in the A. thermophiles
absence of oxygen. The bacterium is probably B. acidophiles
which of the following? C. mesophiles
A. an aerotolerant anaerobe D. psychrotrophs
B. an obligate aerobe
C. an obligate anaerobe 20 . Bacteria isolated from a hot tub at 39 °C are
D. a facultative anaerobe probably which of the following?
A. thermophiles
=== PDF PAGE 372 ===
358 9 • Review Questions
B. psychrotrophs A. acidophiles
C. mesophiles B. barophiles
D. hyperthermophiles C. halotolerant
D. thermophiles
21 . In which environment are you most likely to
encounter a hyperthermophile? 25 . EMB agar is a medium used in the identification
A. hot tub and isolation of pathogenic bacteria. It contains
B. warm ocean water in Florida digested meat proteins as a source of organic
C. hydrothermal vent at the bottom of the nutrients. Two indicator dyes, eosin and
ocean methylene blue, inhibit the growth of gram-
D. human body positive bacteria and distinguish between
lactose fermenting and nonlactose fermenting
22 . Which of the following environments would organisms. Lactose fermenters form metallic
harbor psychrophiles? green or deep purple colonies, whereas the
A. mountain lake with a water temperature of nonlactose fermenters form completely
12 °C colorless colonies. EMB agar is an example of
B. contaminated plates left in a 35 °C which of the following?
incubator A. a selective medium only
C. yogurt cultured at room temperature B. a differential medium only
D. salt pond in the desert with a daytime C. a selective medium and a chemically
temperature of 34 °C defined medium
D. a selective medium, a differential medium,
23 . Which of the following is the reason jams and and a complex medium
dried meats often do not require refrigeration to
prevent spoilage? 26 . Haemophilus influenzae must be grown on
A. low pH chocolate agar, which is blood agar treated with
B. toxic alkaline chemicals heat to release growth factors in the medium. H.
C. naturally occurring antibiotics influenzae is described as ________.
D. low water activity A. an acidophile
B. a thermophile
24 . Bacteria living in salt marshes are most likely C. an obligate anaerobe
which of the following? D. fastidious
Matching
27 . Match the definition with the name of the growth 28 . Four tubes are illustrated with cultures grown in a
phase in the growth curve. medium that slows oxygen diffusion. Match the
culture tube with the correct type of bacteria from
the following list: facultative anaerobe, obligate
___Number of dying cells is A. Lag
anaerobe, microaerophile, aerotolerant anaerobe,
higher than the number of cells phase
obligate aerobe.
dividing
___Number of new cells equal to B. Log
number of dying cells phase
___New enzymes to use available C.
nutrients are induced Stationary
phase
___Binary fission is occurring at D. Death
maximum rate phase
29 . Match the type of bacterium with its
environment. Each choice may be used once,
Access for free at openstax.org
=== PDF PAGE 373 ===
9 • Review Questions 359
more than once, or not at all. Put the appropriate
letter beside the environment.
___thermophile C. deep ocean waters
___psychotroph A. food spoiling in ___hyperthermophile D. human pathogen
refrigerator
___psychrophile E. garden compost
___mesophile B. hydrothermal vent
Fill in the Blank
30 . Direct count of total cells can be performed but not in fresh water is probably a ________.
using a ________ or a ________.
38 . Bacteria isolated from the bottom of the ocean
31 . The ________ method allows direct count of need high atmospheric pressures to survive.
total cells growing on solid medium. They are ________.
32 . A statistical estimate of the number of live cells 39 . Staphylococcus aureus can be grown on
in a liquid is usually done by ________. multipurpose growth medium or on mannitol
salt agar that contains 7.5% NaCl. The
33 . For this indirect method of estimating the
bacterium is ________.
growth of a culture, you measure ________
using a spectrophotometer. 40 . Blood agar contains many unspecified nutrients,
supports the growth of a large number of
34 . Active growth of a culture may be estimated
bacteria, and allows differentiation of bacteria
indirectly by measuring the following products of
according to hemolysis (breakdown of blood).
cell metabolism: ________ or ________.
The medium is ________ and ________.
35 . A bacterium that thrives in a soda lake where the
41 . Rogosa agar contains yeast extract. The pH is
average pH is 10.5 can be classified as a(n)
adjusted to 5.2 and discourages the growth of
________.
many microorganisms; however, all the colonies
36 . Lactobacillus acidophilus grows best at pH 4.5. look similar. The medium is ________ and
It is considered a(n) ________. ________.
37 . A bacterium that thrives in the Great Salt Lake
Short Answer
42 . Why is it important to measure the transmission formation of biofilms on in-dwelling catheters
of light through a control tube with only broth in and prostheses?
it when making turbidity measures of bacterial
46 . Why are some obligate anaerobes able to grow
cultures?
in tissues (e.g., gum pockets) that are not
43 . In terms of counting cells, what does a plating completely free of oxygen?
method accomplish that an electronic cell
47 . Why should Haemophilus influenzae be grown in
counting method does not?
a candle jar?
44 . Order the following stages of the development of
48 . In terms of oxygen requirements, what type of
a biofilm from the earliest to the last step.
organism would most likely be responsible for a
1. secretion of EPS
foodborne illness associated with canned foods?
2. reversible attachment
3. dispersal 49 . Which macromolecule in the cell is most
4. formation of water channels sensitive to changes in pH?
5. irreversible attachment
50 . Which metabolic process in the bacterial cell is
particularly challenging at high pH?
45 . Infections among hospitalized patients are often
related to the presence of a medical device in 51 . How are hyperthermophile’s proteins adapted to
the patient. Which conditions favor the the high temperatures of their environment?
=== PDF PAGE 374 ===
360 9 • Review Questions
52 . Why would NASA be funding microbiology responsible for the fermentation of the fish
research in Antarctica? sauce?
53 . Fish sauce is a salty condiment produced using 54 . What is the major difference between an
fermentation. What type of organism is likely enrichment culture and a selective culture?
Critical Thinking
55 . A patient in the hospital has an intravenous 58 . Refer to Figure 9.15. Why does turbidity lose
catheter inserted to allow for the delivery of reliability at high cell concentrations when the
medications, fluids, and electrolytes. Four days culture reaches the stationary phase?
after the catheter is inserted, the patient
59 . A microbiology instructor prepares cultures for a
develops a fever and an infection in the skin
gram-staining practical laboratory by inoculating
around the catheter. Blood cultures reveal that
growth medium with a gram-positive coccus
the patient has a blood-borne infection. Tests in
(nonmotile) and a gram-negative rod (motile).
the clinical laboratory identify the blood-borne
The goal is to demonstrate staining of a mixed
pathogen as Staphylococcus epidermidis, and
culture. The flask is incubated at 35 °C for 24
antibiotic susceptibility tests are performed to
hours without aeration. A sample is stained and
provide doctors with essential information for
reveals only gram-negative rods. Both cultures
selecting the best drug for treatment of the
are known facultative anaerobes. Give a likely
infection. Antibacterial chemotherapy is initiated
reason for success of the gram-negative rod.
and delivered through the intravenous catheter
Assume that the cultures have comparable
that was originally inserted into the patient.
intrinsic growth rates.
Within 7 days, the skin infection is gone, blood
cultures are negative for S. epidermidis, and the 60 . People who use proton pumps inhibitors or
antibacterial chemotherapy is discontinued. antacids are more prone to infections of the
However, 2 days after discontinuing the gastrointestinal tract. Can you explain the
antibacterial chemotherapy, the patient observation in light of what you have learned?
develops another fever and skin infection and
61 . The bacterium that causes Hansen’s disease
the blood cultures are positive for the same
(leprosy), Mycobacterium leprae, infects mostly
strain of S. epidermidis that had been isolated
the extremities of the body: hands, feet, and
the previous week. This time, doctors remove
nose. Can you make an educated guess as to its
the intravenous catheter and administer oral
optimum temperature of growth?
antibiotics, which successfully treat both the
skin and blood-borne infection caused by S. 62 . Refer to Figure 9.29. Some hyperthermophiles
epidermidis. Furthermore, the infection does not can survive autoclaving temperatures. Are they a
return after discontinuing the oral antibacterial concern in health care?
chemotherapy. What are some possible reasons
63 . Haemophilus, influenzae grows best at 35–37
why intravenous chemotherapy failed to
°C with ~5% CO2 (or in a candle-jar) and
completely cure the patient despite laboratory
requires hemin (X factor) and nicotinamide-
tests showing the bacterial strain was
adenine-dinucleotide (NAD, also known as V
susceptible to the prescribed antibiotic? Why
factor) for growth. (Centers for Disease Control
might the second round of antibiotic therapy
and Prevention, World Health Organization.
have been more successful? Justify your
“CDC Laboratory Methods for the Diagnosis of
answers.
Meningitis Caused by Neisseria meningitidis,
56 . Why are autoinducers small molecules? Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Haemophilus
influenza. WHO Manual, 2nd edition.” 2011.
57 . Refer to Figure B1 in Appendix B. If the results
http://www.cdc.gov/meningitis/lab-manual/full-
from a pond water sample were recorded as 3,
manual.pdf) Using the vocabulary learned in this
2, 1, what would be the MPN of bacteria in 100
chapter, describe H. influenzae.
mL of pond water?
Access for free at openstax.org